Database dummy - table crsedetails
AE 210;Introduction to metal forming,machining and joining processes. Classification of aircraft parts. Aircraft materials. Aircraft production fundamentals. Loft-template method. Computer-aided manufacturing. Aircraft tooling concepts. Forming processes: Rubber-pad forming, Stretch-bending, stretch-wrap forming, high energy rate forming. Unconventional machining processes. Casting processes. Manufacturing processes for typical aircraft and aeroengine parts. Adhesive bonding, riveting, detachable joints, honeycomb sandwich construction. Design and fabrication of tooling. Aircraft assembly techniques and tooling. Heat treatment.Surface treatments, protective treatments and coatings.  Fabrication, machining and joining of FRP composite structures. Characteristics of aerospace vehicle construction. ;Nil; D.F. Horne, Aircraft Production Technology, Cambridge University Press, 1986. 
S.C. Keshu and K.K. Ganapathi, Aircraft Production,Interline Publishing, 1993. 
M.M. Schwartz (ed.),Composite Materials Handbook, McGraw-Hill, 1992. ;;
AE 206; Fluid properties, real and ideal fluid, fluid statics, buoyancy. Classification of flows:compressible and incompressible flows, steady and unsteady flows, uniform and non-uniform flows, laminar and turbulent flows, continuity equation, momentum equation and applications, energy equation and applications.  Ideal fluid flow: irrotational flow, velocity potential, source, doublet, vortex, circulation and vorticity, flowpast circular cylinder and sphere. Real fluid flow: Boundary layer, drag, incompressible internal and external flows, one dimensional compressible flow; dimensional analysis and similarity. ;Nil; Douglas, J.F., Gasiorek, J.M. and Swaffield, J.A., "Fluid Mechanics", Longman ELBS, 1992. 
White F.M., Fluid Mechanics, McGraw Hill, 1979.  ;;
AE 462;Fatigue and fracture considerations in design and lifing of components.  Durability of materials and components at elevated temperatures. Material characterization for fatigue fracture, creep-rupture and application of failure models in design.  Wear aspect of mechanical design. Reliability consideration in design of components and systems. Introduction to probabilistic design methodology. Strength based and time dependent reliability evaluation. ;Nil; Bannantine J.A., Comer J.J., Handrock J.L., Fundamentals of Metal Fatigue Analysis, Prentice Hall Inc. 1990.
Rao S.S. Reliability Based Design, McGraw Hill Inc. 1992
A. Mubeen, Machine Design, Khanna Publishers, 1998. ;;
EN 702;Solar Concentrating Systems;Nil;Rabl;;
EN 704;Thermodynamic Systems;Nil;A Bejan;;
BT 414;Structure of eucaryotic chromosomes; heterochromatin; euchromatin, molecular components, packing and organization nueleosome phasing; DNase I hypersensitive regions; organizations of bacterial genome; DNA structure and replication; proteins and enzymes in DNA replication; Okazaki fragments; replication of double stranded and single stranded circular DNA.;;B. Lewin; Genes VII. John Wiley and Sons, 2000. 
J.D. Watson, N.H. Hopkins, J.W. Roberts, J.A. Seitz and A.M. Weiner; Molecular Biology of the Gene. Benjarnin Cummings Publishing Company, 1987.;;
ME 364;Null;NIL;Null;;
BT 418;Historical Perspectives; mitosis, meiosis, Mendelian genetics; Law of segregation, genotype, phenotype, dominance, recessiveness; incomplete and co-dominance, test cross; dihybrid and multihybrid cross; law of independent assortment; gene interactions, epistasis pleiotropy; variation in gene expression; penetrance; expressivity; effect of enviornment; allelism and complementarily; multiple alleles; sex and interitance; sex-linked genes; sex anomalies crossing over; linkage analysis; genetic mapping; extra chromosomal interitance; aspects of population and evolutionary genetics.;;E.J.Gardner, M.J. Simmons and D.P. Snustad; Principles of Genetics. John Wiley and Sons Inc., 1991.

D.T. Suzuki, A.J.F. Griffiths, J.H. Miller and R.C. Lewontin; An Introduction to Genetic Analysis, W.H. Freernan And cornpany, 1989.;;
AE 315; Potential flow, Circulation and lift generation, Kutta cndition. Thin airfoil theory, Source, Vortex and doublet panel methods. Subsonic compressible flow over airfoils, Prandtl-Glauert Compressibility correction. Supersonic flow over airfoils, Ackeret Theory. Oblique shocks and expansion waves, shock expansion method. Potential flow over finite wings, lifting-line theory, Vortex lattice method, supersonc flow over finite wings, Subsonic/supersonic leading edge. Linearized theory, Supersonic vortex lattice method. Slender body theory: Introduction to transonic flows, conical flows, Hypersonic flow and high-temperature flows. ;AE 206;J.D. Anderson, Fundamentals of Aerodynamics, McGraw Hill, 1991
J.J.Bertin & M.C. Smith, Aerodynamics for Engineers, 1989
A.M. Kuethe & C.Chow, Foundations of Aerodynamics, J. Wiley, 1986
H.Ashly & M.T. Landahl, Aerodynamics of Wings & Bodies, Addison Wesley, 1965. ;;
BT 456;Use of U V Vis spectroscopy and fluorescence spectroscoply to determine solvent exposure/accessibility of aromatic amino acids, in measurement of thermodynamic parameters of heat denaturation of proteins and nucleic acids, in measurement of the conformational stability of a protein; estimation of secondary structure of proteins by CD; determining the binding constant as the number of binding sites by Scatcgard plot; EPR and the use of spin labels; proton NMR of amino acids; assigning the proton resonances of peptides by NMR; FT-IR of protein.;;C.R. Cantor and P.R. Schimmel; Biophysical Chemistry, W.H., 1980.
T.E. Creighton; Protein Structure, I.R.E. Press, 1989.
J.R. Lakowicz; Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, Plenum Press, 1983.;;
BT 458;Experiments to encompose the following broad areas; microscopy, sterilizatin techniques/media, separations; isolation of pure cultures; identification techniques; microbial growth and growth kinetics; productin of bioactive compounds from microbes; immunological tools; bioassays/screening strategies.;;Methods in microbiology series, Academic Press.
Methods in Enzymology series, Academic Press.
Gerhardt et al; Manual methods for general Bacteriology, ASM, 1981.;;
BT 518;Ramachandran or steric contour diagram and potential energy calculations of proteins; hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic interactions, ionic interactions, disulphide bonds and their role in protein structure; secondary structural elements and organisation of tertiary structure; helix coil transition and zipper model.;;C.R. Cantor and P.R. Schirmer; Biophysical Chemistry, W.H. Freeman, 1980.
G. Schulz and R.H. Schrimer; Principles of protein structure, Springer Verlag, 1979.;;
BT 522;Prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell organizations; intracellular compartments and transport: membrane bound organelles, protein sorting, and vesicular transport, secretory pathways, endocytosis pathways, phagocytes and pinocytosis; cell communication: general principles of cell signalling, G-protein linked receptors and enzyme linked receptors; cytoskeleton: intermediate filaments, microtubules and actin filaments, microtubule polymerization dynamics, dynamic instability and cell crawling.;;Bruce Alberts .. et all, Molecular Biology of the Cell, Garland Publishing, Inc., 1989, 2nd edition.
Lodish et al., Molecular Cell Biology, W.H. Freeman & company, New York, 1999, 4th edition.;;
AE 305;Static stability; longitudinal neutral point in stick fixed and stick free conditions, directional stability; Longitudinal & directional control. Lateral stability and control. Equations of motion of rigid aircraft in body fixed axes. Stability axes, stability derivatives. Steady flight and perturbed flight. Various longitudinal and lateral-directional modes. Linearisation of the equations of motion. Decoupling of lateral-directional motion from longitudinal motion. 

;Nil;J. Roskam, Flight Mechanics of Rigid and Elastic Airplanes, University of Kansas Press, 1972. 
R.C.Nelson, Flight Stability & Automatic Control, Mc Graw Hiil International, 1990. 
Perkins, C.D. and Hage, R.E., Airplane Performance Stability and Control, Wiley, New York, 1949. ;;
SI 408;Introduction to data structures and complexity of algorithms. Introduction to a suitable programming language.
Arrays, Lists, Stacks, Queues, trees, graphs, heaps, sets, hash tables.
Internal and external sorting techniques.Tree traversals, graph trversals.
Search techniques, Tree and Graph search.;;R.L. Kruse, B.P. Leung and C.L. Tondo, Data Structures and Programming in C, Prentice Hall of India, 1991.
S. Sahni, Data structures, Algorithms and Applications in C++, Mc-graw Hill International Editions, 1998.
R. Sedgewick, Algorithms in C, Parts 1-4, Addison-wesley, Reading, 1998;;
SI 520;Internet Technologies, Advanced, Java Technologies,Software Development Tools, Parser Generators, GUI builders, Software components: 
Beans, Active X controls.;;http://java.sun.com
http://microsoft.com;;
AE 307; Introduction to modelling of systems: objective, concepts, types of models, Examples of interacting dynamic systems. Dynamic classical models of smple physical systems: Fluid level, Thermal, Electrical and Mechanical networks. Dynamic Models of Electrical and Hydraulic actuation systems, typical complex systems. Block Diagram representation and manipulation. Signal flow graph, Masons Gain formula. Laplace Transform, Transfer function, Transient response of First and second order systems. Characteristic Equation, representation on "s" plane. Concept of stability, Rouths criterion. Introduction to state space Models and Eigenvalues. Single degree of freedom system vibrations, Free and Forced Undamped and Damped Vibrations, Introduction to Vibration Isolation. ;; K. Ogata, "Modern Control Engineering", Prentice-Hall India,New Delhi,1986.
 J.J.D"Azzo & C.H. Houpis, "Linear Control System Analysis and Design", 4th Ed., McGraw Hill, New York, 1995. 
 W. Weaver, S.P. Timoshenko and D.H. Young, "Vibration Problems in Engineering", 5th ed., John-Wiley & Sons, 1990. 
;;
AE 308;Feedback control : mechanism of feedback, system representation, open and closed loop systems , Introduction to laplace transform, laplace transform of system, equations and concept of s- plane representation of system characteristic equation, routh s stability criterion. Transient response and steady state error analysis : Frequency domain : root locus plots, frequency response, nyquist plots and Bode diagrams, robustness and stability margins , compensation via lead, lag and lead-lag compensators, stability margins. 

Introduction to optimum control concepts such as performance index etc.; Introduction to digital control system and z- transform techniques. 

;AE 307;K.Ogata, "Modern Control Engineering", Prentice Hall India, 1986. 
F.H.Raven, "Automatic Control Engineering", Fourth Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1987. 
B.C.Kuo, "Automatic Control Systems", Fifth Edition, Prentice Hall India, 1990 ;;
AE 309;  Introduction to various aircraft propulsive devices: Piston-prop, Turboprop, Turbojet, Turbofan, Turboshaft, Ramjet, Vectored-thrust, Lift engines. Gas Turbine cycles and cycle based performance analysis; 1-D and 2-D analysis of flow through gas turbine components -Intake, Compressors, Turbines, Combustion Chamber, Afterburner, and nozzle. Compressor and Turbine blade shapes; cascade theory; radial equilibrium theory; matching of compressor and turbine. Turbine cooling. Single spool Multi-spool engines. Powerplant performance with varying speed and altitude.  

;AE 202; 
 Cohen, Rogers and Saravanamutto, Gas Turbine Theory Longman,1987 
 G.C Oates (Ed.) Aerothermodynamics of Aircraft Engine Components,AIAA, 1985. ;;
AE 319; Elements of kinematics and dynamics of mechanisms; Motion and force analysis of typical mechanisms, e.g. link mechanisms, universal joint, cams, gears. General principles of Mechanical Design: Dimensioning, limits of fits and tolerances; Failure and mechanical properties of materials, Concepts in allowable stresses, reliability and lifing. Design analysis of common machine elements, e.g. joints, springs, shafts, couplings etc. Terminology and classification concerning gears, bearings, seals.  Concepts in lubrication. ;Nil;

T. Bevan, Theory of Machines, Longmans, 1956.
J.E. Shigley, Mechanical Engineering Design, Mc-Graw Hill Book Co., 1986. ;;
AE 460; Modes of heat transfer and governing equations. Conduction: steady and unsteady conduction, applications. Convection : natural and forced convection, applications. Phase change, Heat exchangers. Radiation : Stefan Boltzmann law, Planck"s law, absorptvity, emissivity, shape factor gas radiation, applications. ;Nil; J.P. Holman, Heat Transfer, McGraw-Hill, 7th Edition, 1992.
S.P. Sukhatme, A Textbook on Heat Transfer, Orient Longman, 1979. ;;
AE 330;Introduction, Various propulsive devices used for aerospace applications, Classifications of rockets: Electrical, Nuclear and Chemical rockets. Applications of rockets. Nozzle design: Flow through nozzle, Real nozzle, Equilibrium and frozen flow, Adaptive and non-adaptive nozzles, thrust-vector controls, Rocket performance parameters. Solid propellant rockets, Grain compositions, Design of Grain. Liquid propellant rockets, Injector design, cooling systems, Feed systems: Pressure feed and turbo-pump feed system. Heat transfer problems in rocket engines. ;Nil; G.C. Oates, Aerothermodynamics of Gas Turbine and Rocket Propulsion, AIAA, 1968.
M. Barrere et al, Rocket Propulsion, Elsevier, London, 1956.
S.P. Sutton, Rocket Propulsion Elements, John Wiley, 1954. ;;
AE 458; Introduction to Turbomachines: Air/Gas flow machines, Turbochargers,Pumps, Blowers, Fans, Gas/Steam Turbines, Wind Turbines. Theories of Turbomachinery; Relevant Aero-Thermodynamic laws; Equations of fluid motion; velocity diagrams; Losses; Choking and Cavitation; Blade/Vane Loading; Design considerations for compressors, fans, blowers & pumps, wind turbines, steam/gas turbines, hydraulic turbines. Application/Installation specific designs.  Modeling of Turbomachnery flows; Dynamic similarity in turbomachinery performance rating; Performance maps; Experimental development; standards, Instrumentation, Calibration and uncertainty of testing; Design/Test/Installed performance of turbomachines. ;Nil; Earl Logan (Jr.), Turbomachinery : Basic Theory and Applications, Marcel Dekkar, 1993. 
David Japikse and N.C. Baines, Introduction to Turbomachinery concepts, Oxford, 1994. 
;;
AE 454; Scalar ODE: Equilibria, Stability, Elementary Bifurcations, Continuation method, Flows and equivalence.  Scalar Maps Fixed points, stability, Logistic map. Planar ODEs & Maps, Linear periodic systems, Linearization, Lyapunov Function, Saddle-Node and Hopf Bifurcations, Period doubling, Global Bifurcations, Structural stability, Conservative systems. Higher order systems, Non-autonomous systems, Chaos. ;; Hale & Kocak, Dynamics and Bifurcations, Springer Verlag, 1991.
Kuznetsov, Applied Bifurcation Theory, Springer Verlag, 1994. 
Strogatz, Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos, Addison Wesley, 1995. ;;
AE 457; Fundamentals of Navigation, Stellar navigation, inertial navigation, radio and radar based navigation systems, satellite based navigation systems, global positioning systems etc. Performance comparison of various types of navigation systems. Fundamentals of Guidance, intercept geometry and collision triangle, proportional navigation and guidance, concept of miss distance and line of sight. Augmented proportional navigation and guidance, command to LOS guidance and beam rider guidance. Strategic consideration, pulsed guidance and Lambert guidance. Concept of Kalman filters, fading memory filters and noise analysis. Target maneuvre and evasion. ;Nil; P. Zarchan, Tactical and Strategic Missile Guidance, AIAA Education Series, 2nd Edition, 1992. ;;
AE 453;Concept of continuum. Use of vectors and tensors. Stress,strain, strain rate, constitutive relations, conservation principles, formulation of total problem-engineering theories of continuum mechanics. ;; Y.C. Fung, A first course in continuum mechanics, Prentice Hall, 1977
L. Malvern, Introduction to the Mechanics of a continuous media, Prentice Hall, 1969. ;;
AE 415;Introduction to spacecrafts, rockets and missiles, their basic functions and features, some examples. Fundamentals of Rocket Performance, simplified equations of variable mass rocket motion. Evaluation of rocket/missile trajectories as projectile motion, rectilinear motion in vacuum & in atmosphere, velocity-mass relations and other performance calculations and the gravity turn trajectory.  Jet damping effect and concept of multistaging in launch vehicles and missiles. Fundamentals of constrained optimization in multistage rockets. Central force motion, Two body and three body problem, Keppler"s laws of planetary motion, Geometry of conic sections and orbit determination from initial conditions. Spacecraft orbit transfer, attitude motion, stability and control of the attitude motion. ;Nil; M.H. Kaplan, Modern Spacecraft Dynamics and control, John Wiley & Sons, London, 1976.
J.W.Cornelisse, Rocket Propulsion and Spaceflight Dynamics, Pitman, London, 1979
W.T. Thompson,Introduction to Space Dynamics, John Wiley & Sons, London, 1963. ;;
AE 443;Fiber reinforced Composites in aerospace structures. Fibers and polymeric matrix materials. Fabrication processes. 

Introduction to anisotropic elasticity, Unidirectional composites, Micromechanics,Interfaces and interphases in polymer composites. Lamination theory and free edge effects. Stress and failure analysis of laminated composites. Hygrothermal and environmental effects. Testing of composite materials.   

Some design concepts for polymer matrix composite structures. Intelligent composites, design approach.  

;Nil; R.M. Jones, Mechanics of composite Materials, Taylor & Francis, 1999
D. Hull and T.W. Clyne, An Introduction to Composite Materials, Cambridge University Press, 1996
L.N. Phillips (ed.), Design with Advanced Composite Materials, Springer-Verlag, 1989.  ;;
AE 451;Root finding, Newton-Raphson method, Interpolation, Approximation, Cubic Splines, Least squares, Numerical Integration, Ordinary Differential equations, Runge Kutta Methods, Finite Difference and Finite Elements, SOR, Eigenvalue problems, Fourier analysis, FFT, Partial Differential equations, Boundary conditions, Spectral methods. ;Nil;P.L. DcVries, A first computational physics, John Wiley, 1974.
J.Stoer & R.Vulirsch, Introduction to Numerical Analysis, Springer Verlag, 1980. ;;
AE 452;Airships:Basic principle of "Lift" generation. Construction-Rigid,Non-rigid,Semi-rigid, Power plants, stability,control and ground handling, performance: maximum speed, cruise speed,climb, ceiling,gust tolerance, Range, Ground support systems. Economics, Applications and comparison with other vehicles. Air cushion vehicles: Basic principle of "Lift" generation. Types of skirts systems and fan systems. Materials and structure. Power plants, stability, control and handling. Power required for "Lift". Estimations of various types of resistances: power needed for propulsion. Performance, Economics, Types and applications of aircushion vehicles. ;;Elsley & Devereux, Hovercraft design and construction, Cornell Maritime press, 1968. 
Trillo, Marine Hovercraft technology, Leonard Hill Publishers, 1971. ;;
SI 414;Classical Optimization Theory: unconstrained optimization, calculus for necessary and sufficient conditions, Newton-Raphson method, unconstrained nonlinear algorithms, direct search, gradient methods.
Constrained Optimization Theory: Jacobian and Lagrangian based approaches, Kuhn Tucker conditions, penalty function methods, separable programming, quadratic programming.
Linear Programming: duality, simplex method revised simplex method, dual simplex method, sensitivity analysis, transportation problems.
Heuristics for Combinational Optimization:
Branch and Bound, hill climbing, simulated annealing, generic algoriths, primal-dual approach.;;E. Arts and J.K. Lenstra, Local Search in Combinational Optimization, John Wiley and Sons, 1997.
M. Bazarra and C. Shetty, Nonlinear Programming, Theory and Algorithms, Wiley, NY,1979.
Edwin K.P. Chong and Stanislaw H. Zak, An Introduction to Optimization, John Wiley & Sons, 1996.;;
MA 446;Complex numbers and the point at infinity. Analytic functions.
Cauchy-Teimann conditions, harmonicity, Mappings by elementary functions. Reimann surfaces. Conformal mappings.
Contour integrals, Cauchy-goursat theorem, simply and multiply connected domains.
Uniform convergence of sequence and series. Taylor and Laurent series. Isolated singularities and residues. Evaluation of real integrals. Calculation of inverse Laplace transforms.
Zeros and Poles, Argument principles, Rouche"s theorm.
Winding numbers.
;;R.V. Churchill and J. W. Brown, Complex Variables and Applications, International Student Edition,Mc-Graw Hill, 4th ed., 1984.
P. Henrici, Applied and Computational Complex Analysis, Vol.1, Wiley, 1974.
B.R. Palka, An Introduction to Complex Function Theory, UTM Springer-Verlag, 1991.
;;
MA 438;Distribution of functions of random variables, order statistics. Estimation - Loss function, risk,minimum risk unbiased estimators, maximum likelihood estimation, methods of moments, Bayes estimation, Sufficient statistics, completeness, Basu"s theorm, exponential families, invariance and maximal invariant statistics.
Testing of Hypotheses - parametric and non-parametric problems, examples with data analytic applications.
Confidence Intervals.;;G. Casella and B. L. Berger, Statistical Inference,
Pacific Grove, Wadsworth and Brooks, 1990.
M. H. DeGroot, Probability and Statistics, Addison-Wesley, 1986.
E.L. Lehmann and G. Casella, Theory of Point Estimation, New York, Springer-Verlag, 1998.;;
MA 436;Cauchy Problems for first Order Hyperbolic Equations: Method of characteristics, Monge cone.
Classification of Second Order Partial Differential Equations: Normal forma and Characteristics.
Initial and Boundary Value Problems: Lagrange Green"s identity and uniqueness by energy methods.
Stability theory, energy conservation and dispersion.
Laplace equations: mean value property, maximum principle, Poission"s formula, Dirichlet"s principle, existence of solution using Perron"s method(without proof).;MA 417;E. DiBenedetto, Partial Differential Equations, 2nd Printing, Birkhauser, Boston, 1995.
Fritz John, Partial Differential Equations, 3rd edition, Narosa Publ. Co., New Delhi, 1979.
P. Prasad and R. Ravindran, Partial Differential Equations, Wiley Eastern Ltd., New Delhi, 1985.;;
MA 444;Principles of floating point computationa and rounding errors. 
System of linear Equations: Factorization methods, pivoting and scaling, residual erroe correction method.
Iteractive methods: Jacobi, Gauss-Seidel methods with convergence analysis, conjugate gradient methods. 
Eigenvalue problems: Only implementation issues. 
Nonlinear Systems: Newton and Newton like methods and unconstrained optimization.
Interpolation: review of Legrange interpolation techniques, piecewise linear and cubic splines, error estimates.
Approximation: Uniform approximation by polynomials, data fitting and least squares approximation.
Numerical Integration: integration by interpolation, adaptive quadratures and Gauss methods.
;;K. E. Atkinson, An Introduction to Numerical Analysis, Wiley, 1989.
S.D. Conte and C. De Boor, Elementary numerical Analysis - An alogrithmic Approach, McGraw-Hill, 1981.
K. Erikson, D. Estep, P. Hansbo and C. Johnson, Computational Differential Equations, Cambridge Universal Press,
1996.
;;
AE 604; The course will cover some topics from the following list including some topics on recent developments in Aerospace structures. 
Non-linear structural mechanics, Fracture Mechanics, Structural stability, three-dimensional composites, Energy Methods, Random Vibrations, Advanced topics in Aero-elasticity, Smart structures, Visco-elasticity, Plasticity, etc. 
The actual coverage will depend on the background of the students and the faculty available to cover the various areas. ;Consent of In-charge;;;
AE 478;Kenneth H. Huebner, The Finite Element Method for Engineers, John Wiley and Sons, Mathematical Modeling; 

DT> Non-linear systems : 
Local theory - equilibrium points, stability, linear systems, controllability, perturbation methods; 
Linear time-variant systems, linear periodic systems; 
State-space analysis; 

Non-linear stability - time-domain and frequency domain 

Introduction to bifurcation and chaos. 


;;Mohler R.R., Nonlinear systems, Vol.I - Dynamics and Control, Prentice Hall, 1991 
Verhulst, F., Nonlinear Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems, Springer-Verlag, 1990 
Hirsch, M.W. and Smale, S., Differential Equations, Dynamical Systems and Linear Algebra, Academic Press, 1974. 
Wiggins, S., Introduction to Applied Nonlinear Dynamical Systems and Chaos, Springer-Verlag, 1990. ;;
AE 480;Basic equations of motion of unsteady potential flow, small perturbation linearised theory. Boundary conditions and additional physical considerations. Solution Methodology, Accelerated flows. Unsteady lift and moments on oscillating two-dimensional thin airfoil and slender wing in incompressible flow and supersonic flow, Piston Theory. Introduction to unsteady lifting surface theory. 

Hamilton s principle, Lagrange s Equations and modal methods, Flutter of three dimensional wing modal. Formulation and assumed modes approaches. Generalised aerodynamic forces and modal unsteady airloads. Solution methods, Introductory concepts in transient motion and gust response. Time domain modelling of modal unsteady aerodynamic forces. 

Introduction to Galloping, Vortex Induced Oscillation, stall flutter and buffeting. 
;AE 445;R.L. Bisplinghoff, H. Ashley and R.L. Halfman "Aeroelasticity , Addison-Wesley Pub. Co.Massachusetts, 1955. 
Y.C. Fung, "An Introduction to the Theory of Aeroelasticity John Wiley & Sons, N.Y. 1955 
R.L. Bisplinghoff and H. Ashley, Principles of Aeroelasticity, John Wiley & Sons, N.Y. 1962. 
E.H. Dowell, H.C. Curtiss, R.H. Scanlan and Sisto F.A Modern Course in Aeroelasticity Sijthoff & Noordoff, Netherlands, 1978 
;;
AE 601;Airflow over wings and bodies, ideal fluid motion, examples of solution of ideal fluid equations for typical body shapes. Elements of airfoil and wing theory, aerodynamic characteristics of finite wings. 

Compressibility effects, shock and expansion waves, basic features of supersonic and hypersonic flows. Introduction to boundary layer concept in aerodynamics. 

Longitudinal aerodynamic characteristics, static stability of the aircraft in the longitudinal mode, C.G. limits, stiffness, control power, lateral characteristics. Dynamic stability, short-period and phugoid approximations, dutch roll, rolling and spiral mode, handling quality requirements. 

;Nil;A.M. Kuethe, & Schetzer, J.D., "Foundation of Aerodynamics" John Wiley & Sons, 1967. 
E.L. Houghton, & Brock, Brock, "Aerodynamics for Engineering students", Edward Arnold, 1970 
B.Etkin, Dynamic of Atmospheric Flight, John Wiley, 1971. 
;;
AE 602;Choice of performance parameters and mission profile to meet the threat/need. Wing planform parameters and their sizing criterion. 

Choice of power plants, horizontal tail and vertical tail sizing. 

Preliminary layout. Limitation/restriction on aircraft performance. 

Basic features of structural design of aircraft components. Nature of construction of aircraft structural components. Bending and torsion of thin-walled beams. Effect of warp restraint. Stability of thin-walled beams and stiffened panels. 

Introduction to aeroelastic instability, wing divergence, control reversal, classical 2-D flutter and buffetting conventional and exotic materials, composites. Special features of aircraft production. 

Loft-template method. Production and assembly tooling. Production processes for typical aircraft and aero-engine components. 

;Nil;L.M. Nikolai, Fundamentals of Aircraft Design University of Dayton, 1975. 
B.E. Sechler, and Dunn, L.G., Airplane Structural Analysis and Design, Dover, 1964. 
A.L. Abibo, and Biryukov, N.M., Aircraft Construction Technology, FTD, Ohio, 1972. 
;;
AE 603;Concepts in propulsion. Trends in gas turbine development. Aircraft engine integration. Aircraft and community noise. Combustion generated pollution. Impact and trends in air transportation. 

Atmosphere, air speeds, level flight cruise, propeller estimation of thrust, climb, descent/glide maneuver. 

;Nil;J.L. Kerrebrock, Aircraft Engines and Gas Turbine, MIT Press, 1977. 
F. Hale, Aircraft Performance Selection and Design, John Wiley, 1984. 
;;
AE 607; Study of Aircraft engine models. Basic Measurement Techniques in thermal, mechanical and fluid systems. Experimentation related to Aerodynamics of Turbomachinery, fuel systems, combustion and vibration in aerospace propulsion systems. 

;Nil;;;
AE 411;Experiments using typical analogue and digital control system setups. Frequency Response tests and other related control theory concept validation with physical systems, Analog simulation of simple systems & Aircraft Longitudinal Dynamics. ;Nil;;;
AE 609;Review of vector calculus, Review of field equations in engineering, Sets and functions, Linear vector spaces, Linear transformations and functionals, Normed spaces, Inner product spaces, variational formulations of boundary value problems, Weak solutions, Minimization of a functional, Lagrange multiplier method, Variational methods of approximations, eg. Ritz Method, Applications to engineering problems. ;;Reddy, J.N., Applied Functional Analysis and Variational Methods in Engineering, McGraw Hill, 1986. 
Naylor, A.W. and Sell, G.R., Linear Operator Theory in Engineering and Science, Rinehart and Winston, 1971. 
Luenberger, D.G., Optimization by Vector Space Methods, John Wiley, 1969. 
;;
IT 402;Systems: Information Systems, Organizational Systems, Operational Systems. Technology: Information Technology (Storage, processing, interface), Database Technology, Object Technologies, Network/Intac Technology. Methodology: Analysis and synthesis techniques, Software Engineering. MFTP: My first team project. ;;Software Engineering: A Practitioner"s Approach 
Database System Concepts 
;;
IT 601;Basics of Object Modelling, Object Classes, Association, Behaviour Description, Object Oriented Analysis of Applications, Object Modelling Technique (OMT), Use cases. Object Oriented Programming Principles, Abstraction, Encapsulation and Inheritance, Methods, Programming in C++ and Java. Use of class libraries. Code reusability. Notion of business objects, design patterns. ;;Object Oriented Modelling and Design 
Object Oriented Software Engineering:A USse Case Driven Approach 
;;
AE 611;  ;;;;
ESS801;;;;;
ESS601;;;;;
BT 593;;;;;
CE 603; ;;;;
AE 651;  Axial Flow Compressor : Work done, pressure-rise, Losses and efficiency, the blade shape, stagger and solidity; Incidence and deviation angles; Transonic/Supersonic blades - shock structures; Blade design on a meridional plane; Vortex Laws - radial distribution; Blade element method of design of stage; Characteristic plots; Multistaging and Matching of stages. Centrifugal compressor : Flow pattern in Impellers; work done, losses and efficiency; Slip factor and degree of reaction; Design choices for impeller vanes: backward, forward curved and Radial; Vaned/Vaneless Diffuser, Axial Flow Turbine: Work extraction; Loading limits, Stator and Rotor - subsonic and supersonic profiles, Reaction and radial variation; Blade cooling techniques; Blade element method of design of stage; Radial Flow Turbine:Work done in impeller, Loading -temperature limits; Losses and efficiency. ;Nil;
N.A.Cumpsty, Compressor Aerodynamics, 1989
J.H. Horlock, Axial Flow Turbine, 1968
Gas Turbine Engine Design (with Video Cassette) - ASME/IGTI, 1989. ;;
IT 602;Introduction, Multimedia and Interactivity, Sound and Audio, Image and Graphics, Animation and Special Effects, Video Technology, Storage Media and Access Speed, Data Compression, Multimedia Document and Interchange Formats, Synchronisation, Multimedia communication on Local and Wide Area Networks. Product Development Overview, Authoring Tools and Metaphors, Production Processes. ;;Multimedia Systems Design 
Multimedia Computing, Communications and Applications 
Creating Multimedia Presentations 
Multimedia Authoring : Building and Developing Documents 
Multimedia Systems ;;
IT 603;Basic Concepts, Introduction to Relational Model, relational algebra, SQL, Physical storage and indexing structures, Query Processing algorithms, Transaction Processing and serializability, Crash Recovery, Concurrency Control. Emerging Database Trends. ;;Data Base Systems Concepts(Third Edition) 
Understanding the New SQL, A Complete Guide 
Fundamentals of Database Systems (Second Edition) ;;
AE 613;Definition of potential flow and its usefulness; exact and approximate methods. Formulation of vortex lattice method Application of vortex lattice method for thin and thick wings, wing body combinations etc., suction analogies. 

Reduction of the problem to an integral equation method of solution choice of surface singularity, control point, law of variation and the type of singularity. Solution of two-dimensional axi-symmetric and three-dimensional problems. Solution of internal flow problems. 

Special applications to cascade, hydrofoils, aerofoils in tunnels, assembly of disjoint bodies etc. Calculation of influence coefficients for two-dimensional axi-symmetric and three dimensional flow problems. Solution of linear algebraic equations for the strengths of singularity. 

;Nil;J.L. Hess and A.M.O. Smith, Calculation of Potential Flow Past Arbitrary Bodies, Progress in Aeronautical Sciences, (Ed: Kuchman), Pergamon Press, 1967. 
;;
IT 604;Prerequisites: A sound understanding of working of computers and experience with different software applications is essential. Communication theory concepts as applied to human computer interfaces, User centered design, User task analysis, Usability issues, Usability in Indian conditions, Interface evaluation methodologies, Interface design principles and issues, Prototyping tools, Future trends of human computer interaction, Analysis seminar, Design seminar ;;The Design of Everyday Things 
Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human-Computer Interaction 
The Elements of User Interface Design 
User and Task Analysis for Interface Design 
The Invisible Computer: Why Good Products Can Fail, the Personal Computer Is So Complex, and Information Appliances Are the Solution 
The Gui Style Guide 
Gui Design Handbook (McGraw-Hill Series on Object Technology) 
The Essential Guide to User Interface Design: An Introduction to Gui Design Principles and Techniques 
Gui Design Essentials 
;;
AE 615;Variational methods. Method of weighted residuals. Finite element method in one dimensional problems. Finite element functions. One dimensional elements, two dimensional elements three dimensional elements, axi-symmetric ring element interpolation functions. Solution and accuracy of finite element equations. Types of finite element equations and boundary conditions. Solution of steady and unsteady problems. Mathematical properties of finite elements. Application of finite element methods for the solution of incompressible viscous flow, compressible inviscid and viscous flow. 

;ME 4203, AE4222;T.J. Chung, Finite Element in Fluid Dynamics, McGraw Hill, 1978. ;;
IT 605;Networking basics, OSI Model, LAN and WAN Technologies, Intac and Intranets. Network protocols, Medium access control, TCP/IP. Network programming, Client-Server architecture, Sockets, Remote Procedure Calls. Distributed applications, File-servers, three-tier applications, Distributed object systems. Synchronization issues in distributed systems. Network security and management ;;An Engineering approach to Computer Networks 
Distributed Operating Systems 
Intacworking with TCP/IP, Principles, Protocols and Architecture 
UNIX Network Programming VolI and Vol II 
Essential Distributed Objects Survival guide ;;
AE 616;  Basic equation of motion. Small perturbation methods in subsonic and supersonic flows. Similarity rules in high speed flows. Transonic flows. Normal and oblique shocks. Conical flow. Flow in ducts of variable cross section. Method of characteristics and design of supersonic nozzles. Viscous effects in compressible flow. Hypersonic flows. ;Nil;H.W. Liepmann and A. Rashko, Elements of Gas Dynamics, John Wiley, 1958. 
A.H. Shapiro, Dynamics and Thermodynamics of Compressible Fluid Flow, Vol.I and II, Ronald Press Co. 1957. 
;;
IT 607;Overview of Basic Introductory Concepts, Software Development and Life Cycle, Project effort estimation, LOC and Function Point based estimates. Software System Analysis, ER model, Data Flow Diagrams. Requirement Specification Document. Software design methodologies, Software architecture design, module design. User Interface Considerations Software Product Development, Coding and Testing, Implementation. Computer Aided Software Engineering ;;Software Engineering- A Practioner"s Approach 3rd edition 
1st Edition, (2nd Edition is shortly due from Springer Verlag) An Integrated Approach to Software Engineering ;;
IT 622;Basic of Electronic Commerce, Characteristics of Electronic Products, Digital Cash and Payment Systems. Financial Services, Information Markets, Product Choices. Intac Infrastructure and pricing. Intranets, Firewalls Security Issues. Authentication and non-repudiation of transactions. Distributed Application Architecture for Electric Commerce. Customer Front-end Design. Production and Supply-chain work flow in e-commerce. ;;Electronic Commerce : A Manager"s Guide 
Frontiers of Electronic Commerce 
Doing business on the Intac : How the Electronic Highway is transforming American Companies 
Electronic Commerce, The New Business Platform for The Intac 
Electronic Commerce - Current Research Issues and Applications 
;;
IT 641;Overview of Intac Technologies, Issues in next generation Intac - Routing, Multicasting, Packet Scheduling, Quality of Service etc. Admission control in Intac: Effective bandwidth, Differentiated services, Policy-based networking, Real time communications over Intac, Intac telephony, Voice over IP, Integrated services. Web QoS, Intelligent caching, Traffic measurement and characterization. ;;Computer Networking A Top Down Approach, On line Web based book, 2000, http://gaia.cs.umass.edu/kurose/Contents.htm 
Computer Networks A Systems Approach 
;;
AE 617;  Scalar conservation laws, Burger s equation, Weak solutions, shocks, entropy conditions, linear hyperbolic systems, linearization of non-linear systems, Riemann problem, Huganiiot laws, rarefaction waves, integral curves, contact discontinuities, solution of Riemann problem for Euler equations. 
Numerical schemes for linear equations, CFL condition, upwind methods, conservative methods, Lax-wendroff theorem, Godunov s method, approximate Rumann solvers, Roe s solver, High resolution methods, TVD schemes, flux limiters, multidimensional upwinding. 

;Nil;Leveque R.J., Numerical Methods for Conservation Laws, Birkhanser Verlag, 1990 
Whitham G., Linear and Nonlinear Waves, Wiley, 1974 
Hirsch, C., Numerical Computation of Internal and External Flows, Wiley 1988 

;;
IT 642;Prerequisites: An undergraduate course in database systems is helpful. Basic data warehouse architecture, data consolidation, warehouse internals: storage and indexing, materialized views and aggregate precomputation. Online analytical Processing (OLAP) systems. Data Mining: main operations: clustering, classification, regression, neural networks, feature selection, deviation detection, item set associations, discoveries along time, similarity of complex objects. System integration issues in decision support tools. Survey of existing mining and OLAP products, success and failure stories of data mining. ;;;;
IT 644;Prerequisite: IT 605 or equivalent. Overview of wireless technologies. Wireless multiple access protocols. Channel allocation in cellular systems. Location management. Energy efficient management of computing resources. Mobile IP. TCP over wireless. Mobile ad hoc networking. Data broadcasting. Impact of mobility on algorithms and applications. Disconnected operation of mobile hosts. Mobile databases. Mobile agents. ;;;;
IT 646;Review of Background on data models and query languages Data Integration: heterogeneous databases and other online data sources Modeling issues in data warehousing, OLAP, and mining Semi-structured and unstructured data and XML ;;Database Management Systems 
Database System Concepts 
Advanced Database Systems 
Principles of Database and Knowledge-Base Systems, vol. II 
Principles of Database and Knowledge-Base Systems, vol. I 
Logic Programming and Databases 
A Mathematical Introduction to Logic 
Logic for Computer Science 
Logic for Computer Science 
Foundations of Logic Programming, 2nd Edn 
Data on the Web: From Relations to Semi-structured data and XML 
;;
IT 661;Assessment of technology and industry trends, Environment scanning and mapping of opportunities, IT start-ups, killer applications. Identification of the venture. Enterprise management, Market research, Management of resources including human resources, Management of technology and innovations, Issues related to sourcing and dealing with finance, Payments and receivables, Financial institutions and venture capital. Laws related to employment, taxes, excise, customs, power, communication, utilities and infrastructure facilities, Valuation, contracts and negotiations, Export and trade related practices and policies, Export zones and technology/software parks. Intelligent property right, Patents and Copyrights. Learning from great IT organisations; Large corporatess (IBM, Microsoft, Intel, Oracle, TCS, Infosys, HCL, Wipro, etc.); Successful startups (Excelan, hotmail, Amazon, SAS, PSPL, etc.) ;;Entrepreneurship playing to win 
Business Legends 
Managing for the future 
The Road Ahead 
The Circle of Innovation 
Critical Chain 
;;
IT 662;Perspectives of Enterprise Management. Essentials of Competitive Excellence. Different approaches for Enterprise Management. The emergence and need for ERP concept. ERP Systems For manufacturing and service based organisations. Software Architecture of a typical ERP Systems, Options of various paradigms Identification of suitable platforms. Role of SDLC/SSAD. Object oriented architecture. Browser based front-ends. Selection and Implementation of ERP Systems. Critical factors guiding selection and evaluation. Strategies for successful implementation. Impediments and initiatives to achieving success. Critical success and failure factors. Integrating ERP into organisational culture. False proofing and confidence building. Case studies. 
;;Understanding SAP R/3 
SAP R/3 Implementation Guide 
Network Resource Planning for SAP R/3, Bann IV and People Soft 
;;
ES 656;;;;;
ES 658;;;;;
ES 660;;;;;
ES 620;;;;;
MGS601;Seminar;Nil;Nil;;
MGP604;;;;;
MA 002;Function, Inverse function, Elementary functions and their graphs, Limit, Continuity, Derivative and its geometrical significance. Differentiability. Derivatives of sum, difference, product and quotient of functions. Derivatives of polynomial, rational, trigonometric, logarithmic, exponential, hyperbolic, inverse trigonometric and inverse hyperbolic functions. Differentiation of composite and implicit functions.
Tangents and Normals, Increasing and decreasing functions.  Maxima and Minima.
Integrations as the inverse process of differentiation, Integration by parts and by substitution. Definite integrals and its application to the determination fo areas.;;;;
MA 212;Basic definition of probability, random variables, probability density function, probability distribution function, standard univariate and multivariate distributions, conditional distributions and densities, moment generating functions, characteristics functions, limit theorems.
Point estimation, interval estimation.  hypo-thesis testing. Simple linear regressiong, correlation.
Random Processes: Markov processes, stationary processes, Ergodicity, auto-correlation, cross-relation, power spectral density.
Exposure to statistical packages like SAS and SPSS.;;T.K. Chandra and D. Chatterjee, A first Course in Probability, Narosa Oublishing House, New Delhi, 2001.
D. M. Himmelblau, Process Analysis by Statistical Methods, Wiley, 1970.
P.G. Hoel, S. C. Port and C. J. Stone, Introduction to Probability Theory, Universal Book Stall, New Delhi, 1994.
P.G. Hoel, S. C. Port and C. J. Stone, Introduction to Statistical Thoery, Universal Book STall, Delhi, 1996.
H. J. Larson, Introduction to probability, Theory and Statistical Inference, 3rd Ed., Wiley, 1982.;;
MA 103;  Review of the prerequisites such as limits of sequences and functions, continuity, uniform continuity and differentiability. Rolle"s theorem, mean value theorems and Taylor"s theorem. Newton"s method for approximate solution. Riemann integral and the fundamental theorem of integral calculus. Approximate integration. Applications to length, area, volume, surface area of revolution. Moments, centres of mass and gravity. 
Review of vectors. Cylinders and quadratic surfaces. Vector functions of one variable and their derivatives. 

Partial derivatives. Chain rule. Gradient, directional derivative. 

Tangent planes and normals. Maxima, minima, saddle points. Lagrange multipliers. Exact differentials. 

Repeated and multiple integrals with applications to volume, surface area, moments of inertia etc. 

;;G.B. Thomas, and R.L. Finney, Calculus and Analytic Geometry, 9th ed.,ISE Reprint, Addison-Wesley, 1998. 
T.M. Apostol, Calculus, Vol. I, 2nd ed., Wiley Eastern, 1980. 
;;
MA 104;Vector fields, surface integrals, line integrals, independence of path, conservative fields, divergence, curl. Green"s theorem. Divergence theorem of Gauss, Stokes"theorem and applications of these theorems. 
Transformations of coordinate systems and vector components. Invariance of divergence and curl. Curvilinear coordinates. 

Vector spaces. Inner products. Matrices and determinants, linear transformations. Systems of linear equations. Gauss elimination, rank of a matrix. Inverse of a matrix. Bilinear and quadratic forms. 

Eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Similarity transformations. 

Diagonalization of Hermitian matrices. 

Numerical methods for solving systems of linear equations. 

Ill-conditioning. Methods of Gauss and least squares. Inclusion of matrix eigenvalues. Finding eigenvalues by iteration. 

;;E. Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 5th ed., Wiley Eastern, 1985. 
V. Krishnamurthy, V.P. Mainra and J.L. Arora, An Introduction to Linear Algebra, Affiliated East-West, 1976. 
T.M. Apostol, Calculus, Vol. II, 2nd ed., Wiley Eastern, 1980. 
;;
ES 614;;;;;
ES 618;;;;;
ES 642;;;;;
ES 644;;;;;
ES 624;;;;;
ES 648;;;;;
ES 650;;;;;
ES 652;;;;;
ES 654;;;;;
MA 203;   Ordinary differential equations of the 1st order, exactness and integrating factors, variation of parameters, Picard"s iteration method. 

Ordinary linear differential equations of nth order, solution of homogeneous and nonhomogeneous equations. Operator method. Methods of undetermined coefficients and variation of parameters. 

Systems of differential equtions. Phase plane. Critical points. Stability. 

Infinite sequences and series of real and complex numbers. Improper integrals. Cauchy criterion, tests of convergence, absolute and conditional convergence. Series of functions. Improper integrals depending on a parameter. Uniform convergence. Power series, radius of convergence. 

Power series methods for solutions of ordinary differential equations. 

Legendre equation and Legendre polynomials, Bessel equations and Bessel functions of first and second kind. Orthogonal sets of functions. 

Sturm-Liouville problems. Orthogonality of Bessel functions and Legendre polynomials. 

Laplace transform. Inverse transform. Shifting on the s and t axes, convolutions, partial fractions. 

Fourier series, half-range expansions. Approximation by trigonometric polynomials. Fourier integrals. 

Transform techniques in differential equations. 
;;E. Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 9th ed., John Wiley & Sons 1999.. 
W.E. Boyce and R.C. DiPrima, Elementary Differential Equations and Boundary Value Problems, 3rd ed., Wiley, 1977. 
G.F. Simmons, Differential Equations with Applications and Historical Notes,  McGraw-Hill, New York, 1991. ;;
MA 204;Analytic functions. Cauchy-Riemann equations, Laplace equation. 
Elementary functions. Cauchy"s integal theorem (proof by using Green"s theorem), Cauchy"s integral formula. Taylor series and Laurent series. 

Residues and applications to evaluating real improper integrals and inverse Laplace transforms. Conformal mapping. Linear fractional transformations. 

Boundary value problems involving partial differential equations such as the wave equation, the heat equation, the Laplace equation. 

Solutions by the method of separation of variables and by Fourier and Laplace transforms. 

;;E. Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 5th ed., Wiley Eastern, 1985. 
P.E. Danko, A.G. Popov, T.YA. Koznevnikova, Higher Mathematics in Problems and Exercises, Part 2, Mir Publishers, 1983. 
;;
MA 210;Interpolation by polynomials. Divided differences. Error of the interpolating polynomial. Piecewise linear and cubic spline interpolation. 
Numerical integration. Composite rules. Error formulae. 

Solution of a system of linear equations. Implementation of Gaussian elimination and Gauss-Seidel methods. 

Solution of a nonlinear equation. Bisection and secant methods. 

Newton"s method. Rate of convergence. Solution of a system of nonlinear equations. 

Numerical solution of ordinary differential equations. Euler and Runge-Kutta methods. Multi-step methods. Predictor-corrector methods. 

Order of convergence. Finite difference methods. Numerical solution of elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic partial differential equations. 

Exposure to software packages like IMSL Subroutines, MATLAB. 

;;S.D. Conte and Carl de Boor, Elementary Numerical Analysis - An Algorithmic Approach, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill, 1980. 
C.E. Froberg, Introduction to Numerical Analysis, 2nd ed., Addison-Wesley, 1981. 
E. Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 5th ed., Wiley, 1985. 
;;
MA 402;Review of groups, subgroups, homomorphisms, finite and discrete groups of motions, group actions, class equation, Sylow theorems, groups of order 12, generators and relations, SL(R), SU(2), simplicity of alternating groups and PSL(2). Rings, ideals, quotient rings, Euclidean domains, principal ideal domains, unique factorization domains, primes in Z[i] and Fermat"s 2-square theorem, ideal classes in imaginary quadratic fields. 

Modules, matrices, free modules and bases, diagonalization of integer matrices, generators and relations for modules, structure theorem for abelian groups, applications to Jordan canonical forms and linear operators. 

Extension fields, splitting fields, fundamental theorem of Galois Theory, constructibility by ruler and compass, finite fields. 
;MA 401;M. Artin, Algebra, Prentice-Hall, 1990. 
I.N. Herstein, Topics in Algebra, Wiley Eastern, 1987. 
K.D. Joshi, Foundations of Discrete Mathematics, Wiley Eastern, 1989. 
N. Jacobson, Basic Algebra, Vol. I, Hindustan Publishing Corporation, 1984. 
;;
MA 403;     Metric spaces, compactness, connectedness, completeness. Continuity. 

Monotonic functions. Differentiation of vector-valued functions. 

Functions of bounded variation and absolutely continuous functions. 

Riemann-Stieltjes integral and its properties. Fundamental theorem of integral calculus. 

Sequences and series of functions, uniform convergence and its relation to continuity, differentiation and integration. Equicontinuous families of functions, Ascoli-Arzela theorem. Weierstrass approximation theorem. Fourier series, Fejer"s theorem, pointwise convergence. 


;NIL;T. Apostol, Mathematical Analysis, 2nd ed., Addison-Wesley, 1974.
Ganapati Iyer, Mathematical Analysis, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1977.
W. Rudin, Principles of Mathematical 
Analysis, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill, 1983.

;;
MA 404;Functions of several variables: differentiation, the inverse function theorem, the implicit function theorem, the rank theorem, derivatives of higher order and differentiation of integrals, integration, change of variables, Divergence and Stokes"theorem in Euclidean spaces. 

Hilbert spaces, orthonormal basis, projection and Riesz representation theorems. Approximation and optimization in Hilbert spaces. 

Variational problems, Lax-Milgram lemma and its applications. 

;MA 401, MA 403;W. Rudin, Principles of Mathematical Analysis, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill, 1982. 
T. Apostol, Mathematical Analysis, 3rd ed., Tata McGraw-Hill, 1974. 
W. Fleming, Functions of Several Variables, Springer-Verlag, 1977. 
B.V. Limaye, Functional Analysis, 2nd ed., Wiley Eastern, 1996. 
J.N. Reddy, Applied Functional Analysis and Variational Methods in Engineering, McGraw-Hill International Edition, 1986. 
;;
MA 405;Complex numbers and the point at infinity. Analytic functions. 

Cauchy-Riemann conditions, harmonic functions. Mappings by elementary functions. Riemann surfaces. Conformal mapping. Transformations of harmonic functions. Applications to physical problems involving Laplace"s equation. Contour integrals, Cauchy-Goursat theorem, simply and multiply connected domains. 

Uniform convegence of sequences and series. Taylor and Laurent series. Isolated singularaities and residues. Evaluation of real integrals. Calculation of inverse Laplace transforms. 

Zeros and poles. The argument principle. Rouche"s theorem. 

;NIL;R.V. Churchill and J.W. Brown, Complex Variables and Applications International Student Edition, McGraw-Hill, 4th ed., 1984 
P. Henrici, Applied and Computational Complex Analysis, Vol.1, Wiley, 1974. ;;
AE 631;Aerodynamic and inertial loadings on wing arising due to air load, fuel weight and wing structure weight for various flight and landing cases. 

Net bending moments, shear and torque on wing. Overload cases. 

Preliminary estimates of section area requirements, locations of spars and ribs. Section properties, bending, shear and torsional stresses at spanwise wing section. Checking and fixing of load bearing elements, introduction of concentrated loads into the wing shell structure. 

Limitations to aircraft performance. Airworthiness requirements. 
;Nil;E. Torenbeek, Synthesis of Subsonic Airplane Design, Delft University Press, 1977. 
E.F. Bruhn, Analysis and Design of Flight Vehicles Structures, Tristate Offset Co., 1965. 
P.D. Desai, Wing Design Monograph, IIT Bombay, 1983, Vol. I & II. 
Daniel P.Raymer, A/c Design, A Conceptual Approach, AIAA Education Series, 1989 
;;
MA 406;Topologies through open sets, bases, sub-bases, closure, interior, boundary, subspaces. 

Continuity, open functions, homeomorphisms, embeddings, strong and weak topologies generated by families of functions. Quotient spaces. 

First and Second countable, separable, Lindeloff, compact spaces. 

Separation axioms, Urysohn"s lemma. Products, embeddings into products, Urysohn metrisation theorem, Convergence of nets and filters. Filters and compactness, ultrafilters, Tychonoff compactness theorem. Local compactness, Alexandroff compactification. Function spaces, compact-open topology. Connectedness, components, local connectedness, paths, loops. Homotopy, fundamental group. Computation of the fundamental group of the circle. 

;MA 403;K.D. Joshi, Introduction to General Topology, Wiley Eastern, 1983. 
J.L. Kelly, General Topology, Van Nostrand, 1955. 
;;
MA 407;Floating point arithmetic and rounding errors. Polynomial interpolation, Newton divided differences, interpolation error. Linear and cubic splines. Least squares approximation by polynomials. 

Numerical integration and differentiation. 

Systems of linear equations: Gaussian elimination with scaling and pivoting. LU and QR decomposition. Perturbation of a solution. 

Iterative improvement. Jacobi, Gauss-Seidel and SOR methods. 

Matrix eigenvalue problem : Gershgorin theorem. Power and Inverse Power Methods. 

Solution of non-linear equations: Regula-falsi, Secant and Newton methods. 

Numerical solution of ODEs: Initial value problem, single-step and multi-step methods with stability analysis. 

;NIL;K.E. Atkinson, An Introduction to Numerical Analysis, Wiley, 1978. 
C.E. Froberg, Introduction to Numerical Analysis, Addison-Wesley, 1981. 
E. Isaacson and H.B. Keller, Analysis of Numerical Methods, Wiley, 1966. 
;;
AE 632;Atmosphere. Aircraft instruments to measure speed, altitude, outside air temperature and pressure. Determination of flight characteristics of aircraft such as maximum speed, best climb rate, service ceiling, range endurance etc. with turbojet and turboprop engines. 

Flight test techniques to evaluate aerodynamic derivatives. In flight engine thrust determination, calibrated engine/wake survey. Aircraft drag polar determination. Aircraft stability and control characteristics evaluation. Methods of extracting stability derivatives from flight test data, equation error method, output error methods. 

Flight testing at limited speeds and Mach numbers in the flight regimes restricted by strength, flutter, vibration, stability and controllability, aerodynamic heating. 

;AE4423 or equivalent;M.G. Kotik et al., Flight Testing of Aircraft, NASA,TTF 442, 1967. 
C.D. Perkins and E. J. Durbin (Ed.), Flight Test Manual (AGARD) Vol. II, Stability and Control, Pergamon Press, 1957. 
R.M. Herrington et. al., Flight Test Engineering Hand Book, AFTER No. 6273, USAF, 1964. 
Jean Ross A., Application of Parameter Identification Techniques to Analysis of Flight Data. Prog. Aerospace Sci., Vol. 18, pp 325-350, Pergamon Press, 1978. 
;;
MA 408;Semi-algebra, algebra, sigma-algebra, monotone classes. Measure spaces. Extension of measures from algebras to sigma-algebras. 

Lebesgue, Lebesgue-Stieltjes measures. Properties of Lebesgue measure on R. Simple functions, Measureable functions and their properties. Egoroff"s Theorem. Convergence a.e. and convergence in measure. Integration with respect to a measure. Monotone convergence theorem, Fatou"s lemma, Dominated convegence theorem. Spaces of p-integrable functions, convergence in pth mean and its relations to other modes of convergence. 

Absolute continuity of measures, Radon-Nikodym Theorem. Product measure spaces. Fubini"s theorem. Lebesgue measures in Euclidan spaces and their properties. Change of variables formula. 

;MA 403;H. Baur, Probability Theory and Elements of Measure Theory, Academic Press, 1985. 
P. Billingsley, Probability and Measure, Wiley, 1985. 
P.R. Halmos, Measure Theory, Graduate Texts in Maths, Springer-Verlag, 1979. 
K.R. Parthasarathy, Introduction to Measure and Probability, Macmillan, 1977. ;;
MA 409;Review of solution methods for first order and second order equations; power series method and properties of Bessel functions and Legendre polynomials, existence and uniqueness of solutions for initial value problems, systems of linear differential equations: Principle of superposition, fundamental solutions and their properties. Method of variation of parameters. Critical points and stability for autonomous systems. Sturm-Liouville problems, eigenfunction expansions with properties. Cauchy problem for first order quasilinear partial differential equations: method of characteristics and Charpit"s method. 

Classification of second order equations in two space variables. 

Separation of variable methods for Laplace, Heat and Wave equations. 

;NIL;G. Birkhoff and G.C. Rota, Ordinary Differential Equations, Wiley, 1978. 
M. Braun, Differential Equations and Their Applications, 4th ed., Springer Verlag, 1993. 
E.A. Coddington, An Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations, Prentice-Hall, 1974. 
R.P. Agarwal and R. Gupta, Essentials of Ordinary Differential Equations, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1991. 
F. John, Partial Differential Equations, 3rd ed., Narosa, 1979. 
I.N. Sneddon, Elements of Partial Differential Equations, McGraw-Hill, 1957. 
A.N. Tychonov and A.A. Samarski, Partial Differential Equations of Mathematical Physics, Vol. I, Holden-Day, 1970. 
H.F. Weinberger, A First Course in Partial Differential Equations, Blaisdell, 1965. 
;;
AE 634;Wing Parameters, VTO and V-G wings. Weapons carriage and delivery, Vertical stabilisers, Tail planes, - tailless - canard design, Flight Control Systems, Air intakes and powerplants, Design for Performance. 

Sizing of aircraft. Longitudinal stability and control. Lateral stability and control. 

;Nil;Aircraft Design Integration and Optimization, Vol. 1, AGARD-CP-147, 1974. 
L.M. Nicolai, Fundamentals of Aircraft Design, METS Incorporated, USA, 1975. 
Optimization in Aircraft Design, Proceedings of the Royal Aeronautical Society Symposium, Nov., 1972. 
Daniel P.Raymer, A/c Design, A Conceptual Approach, AIAA Education Series, 1989 
E. Torenbeek, Synthesis of Subsonic Airplane Design, Delft University Press, 1977. 
;;
MA 410;Classification of partial differential equations in general: second order equations in several variables, first order systems. Stability theory, energy conservation and dispersion. 

Wave equation: Uniqueness, D"Alembert"s method, method of spherical means, method of descent and method of successive approximation. 

Fourier transforms and applications to initial value problems for heat and wave equations. Review of method of separation of variables, construction of Green"s function and properties. 

Uniqueness of solution by energy method, maximum principle for elliptic and parabolic equations. 

Symmetric Hyberbolic Systems: Basic energy inequality, existence and uniqueness of solution. 

;MA 409;F. John, Partial Differential Equations, 3rd ed., Narosa, 1979. 
I.N. Sneddon, Elements of Partial Differential Equations, McGraw-Hill, 1957. 
I.N. Tychonov and A.S. Samarski, Partial Differential Equations of Mathematical Physics, Vol. I, Holden-Day, 1970. 
H.F. Weinberger, A First Course in Partial Differential Equations, Blaisdell, 1965. 
Erich Zanderer, Partial Differential Equations of Applied Mathematics, 2nd ed., Wiley, 1989. 
;;
MA 412;Continuum hypothesis, velocity field, stream function, velocity potential, stress tensor, pressure, vorticity, strain-rate, constitutive equation (stress and strain rate relation), classification of fluids. 

Conservation laws (mass, momentum and energy), Kelvin"s circulation theorem, Bernoulli"s equation and its applications, potential flows, and D"Alembert"s paradox. 

Navier-Stokes equations in cartesian, cylindrical polar, spherical polar and curvilinear coordinate systems. Simple cases of viscous flows (channel flow, Couette flow, Poiseuille flow, flow between rotating and non-rotating coaxial cylinders etc.) and their applications. 

Non-dimensionalization of Navier-Stokes equation and introduction to non-dimensional numbers (Reynolds, Prandtl, Eckert etc.) and their implications. 

;NIL;L.M. Milne-Thomson, Theoretical Hydrodynamics, Macmillan, 1962. 
H.S. Schlichting, Boundary Layer Theory, McGraw-Hill, 1979. 
A.H.P. Skelland, Non-Newtonian Flow and Heat Transfer, Wiley, 1967. 
F. Chorlton, Textbook of Fluidmechanics, D. Van Nostrand, 1967. 
Y.C. Fung, A First Course in Continuum Mechanics, Prentice-Hall, 1969. 
;;
MA 414;Theory of stress, the state of stress at a point, the laws of stress transformation, geometric representations of the state of stress at a point. Theory of strain, changes in lengths of straight line segments and transformation of angles between straight line segments under the assumptions of infinitesimal deformations. 

Hooke"s law, homogeneous isotropic media, fundamental boundary-value problems of elasticity, unqiueness of solution. Plane stress and plane strain equation. 

;NIL;A.J. Durelli, E.A. Phillips and C.H. Tsao, Introduction to the Theoretical and Experimental Analysis of Stress and Strain, McGraw-Hill, 1958. 
I.S. Sokolnikoff, Mathematical Theory of Elasticity, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1977. 
;;
AE 635; Special features of aircraft production. Classification of aircraft parts. Aircraft materials. Tooling design. Manufacture of typical formed and machined aircraft and aeroengine parts : Analysis and Technology. Introduction to theory of plasticity.  Flexible die forming, hgh energy rate forming, unconventional machining processes. Casting processes. Heat treatment. Surface treatments protective treatments and coatings. CNC machining. Fabrication machining and joining of FRP composite structures. Honeycomb sandwich structures. Economic effectiveness of manufacturing processes. Characteristics of aerospace vehicle construction.;Nil;D.F. Horne, Aircraft Production Technology, Cambridge University Press, 1986. 
A. Ghosh and A.K. Mallik, Manufacturing Science, East - West Press Pvt.Ltd., 1988. 
G. Lubin, Handbook of Composites, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1982.
;;
AE 643;Fatigue and fracture considerations in design and lifing of components. Durability of materials and components at elevated temperatures.  Material characterization for fatigue, fracture, creep-rupture and application of failure models in design. Wear aspect of mechanical design. Reliability consideration in design of components and systems. Introduction to probabilistic design methodology. Strength based and time dependent reliability evaluation. ;; Bannantine J.A., Comer J.J., Handrock J.L., Fundamentals of Metal Fatigue Analysis, Prentice Hall Inc. 1990
Rao S.S., Reliability Based Design, McGraw Hill Inc. 1992
A.Mubeen, Machine Design, Khanna Publishers, 1998. ;;
MA 416;Introduction to perturbation theory : Asymptotic expansions. Method of steepest descent. Regular and singular perturbation methods. Methods of strained coordinates, multiple scales, matched asymptotic expansions. 

Singular perturbation methods. Variational techniques : Ritz method, Galerkin method, Least square method. 

;MA 409;S.G. Mikhlin, Variational Methods in Mathematical Physics, Macmillan, 1964. 
Ali Nayfeh, Perturbation Methods, Wiley, 1973. 
C.M. Bender and S.A. Orszag, Advanced Mathematical Methods for Scientists and Engineer, McGraw-Hill, 1978. 
J. Kevorkian and J.D. Cole, Perturbation Methods in Applied Mathematics, Springer Verlag, 1985. 
;;
MA 418;Standard univariate and multivariate distributions. Generating functions, Characteristic functions, inversion theorem, continuity theorem. 

The problem of moments. Distribution of functions of random variables. 

Pearson distributions, Edgeworth and other related expansions, Order Statistics, distribution of random variables defined through ranks. 

Multiple and partial correlations. Limiting distributions of likelihood ratio statistics. 

;NIL;M. Fisz, Probability and Mathematical Statistics, Wiley, 1961. 
C.R. Rao, Linear Statistical Inference and its Applications, Wiley Eastern, 1973. 
M.G. Kendall, and A. Stuart, The Advanced Theory of Statistics, Vol.1, Griffin, 1958. 
N.L. Johnson, and S. Kotz, Discrete Distributions, Wiley, 1969. 
N.L. Johnson, and S. Kotz, Distributions in Statistics : Continuous Univariate Distributions, Vol. I & II, Wiley, 1970. 
N.L. Johnson, and S. Kotz, Distributions in Statistics: Continuous Multivariate Distributions, Wiley, 1972. 
;;
MA 420;Mathematical foundations. Linear Optimization. Simplex method. Revised simplex method. Duality and sensitivity. Unconstrained optimization of functions of several variables. Classical techniques. Numerical methods for unconstrained optimization. 

Constrained optimization of functions of several variables. Lagrange multipliers. Kuhn-Tucker theory. Numerical methods for constrained optimization. Convex optimization. Quadratic optimization. Dynamic programming. 

;NIL;G. Hadley, Linear Programming, Addison Wesley, 1962. 
G. Hadley, Non-linear and Dynamic Programming, Addison Wesley, 1964. 
M. Panik, Classical Optimization : Foundations and Extensions, North Holland/American Elsevier, 1976. 
S.S. Rao, Optimization Theory and Applications, Wiley Eastern, 1978. 
J.K. Sharma, Mathematical Models in Operations Research, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1989. 
D.M. Himmelblau, Applied Nonlinear Programming, McGraw-Hill, 1972. 
;;
AE 638; Aircraft assembly techniques. Assembly of rigid components. 

Design and manufacture of tooling. Assembly of aircraft components by means of jigs and fixtures. Assembly datum surfaces. Master tooling. Manufacture of assembly fixture components : Subassembly and final assembly tooling . Erection of assembly fixture. Handling equipment. Assembly of riveted, welded and adhesive bonded subassemblies. Detachable joints. Installation processes. Assembly of aircraft sections and units. Inspection and testing. Coordination of master, manufacturing and assembly tooling. 

Plastics for tooling. Adhesive bonding techniques and applications. Manufacture and assembly of FRP composite structures, machining and joining techniques. Quality and reliability of an aircraft. Estimating and planning of production. CADCAM. 

;AE;D.F. Horne, Aircraft Production Technology, Cambridge University Press, 1986. 
A.L. Abibov and M.M. Biryukov, Aircraft Construction Technology, FTD, NTIS, Ohio, 1972. 
F.L. Mathews (ed), Joining Fibre Reinforced Plastics, Elsevier Applied Science Publishers Ltd., 1987. 
J.J. Morena, Advanced Composite Mold Making, Van Mostrand Reinhold Company, 1988. 
George Lubin (ed), Handbook of Composites, Van Mostrand Reinhold Company, 1982. 
;;
MA 422;Probability space, conditional probability, independence of events, Borel-Cantelli lemmas, zero-one laws. 

Random variables, distribution functions, sequences of random variables, expected value, convergence theorems, various modes of convergence. Fubini"s theorem (statement only). Joint distributions, independence of random variables. 

Moment generating function, characteristic function, central limit theorems, laws of large numbers. 

Radon-Nikodym Theorem (statement only), conditional expectation, conditional distribution. 

;NIL;H. Bauer, Probability Theory and Elements of Measure Theory, Academic Press, 1981. 
P. Billingsley, Probability and Measure, Wiley, 1985. 
;;
MA 424;Simple random sampling. Sampling for proportions and percentages. 

Estimation of sample size. Stratified random sampling, ratio estimators. Regression estimators. Systematic sampling. Type of sampling unit, Subsampling with units of equal and unequal size. Double sampling. Sources of errors in surveys. 
;NIL;W.G. Cochran, Sampling Techniques, 3rd ed., Wiley Eastern, 1977. 
Des Raj, Sampling Theory, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1978. 
A. Chaudhuri and H. Stenger, Survery Sampling: Theory and Methods, Marcell Dekker, 1992. 
;;
MA 501; Solution by radicals of equations of degree at most 4, solvable groups, solvability by radicals, Abel-Ruffini theorem, symmetric functions, Newton"s identities for symmetric functions, Galois groups of equations of degree at most 4. Equations with symmetric and alternating groups as Galois groups. Reduction mod p technique. Cyclotomic extensions, norm and trace, cyclic extensions and Hilbert"s theorem 90, Artin-Schreier theorem, transcendental extensions. 

Zero divisors, nilpotent elements, nilradical and Jacobson radical, operations on ideals, extension and contraction, examples of rings arising in Geometry, Combinatorics, Number Theory and Topology. 

;MA 402;O. Zariski and P. Samuel, Commutative Algebra, Vol. I, Van Nostrand, 1958. 
N. Jacobson, Basic Algebra Vols. I and II, Hindustan Publishing Corporation, 1984. 
M. Artin, Algebra, Prentice-Hall, 1990. 
M.F. Atiyah and I.G. Macdonald, Introduction to Commutative Algebra, Addison-Wesley, 1969. 
;;
MA 502;Binary quadratic forms, Legendre-Gauss theory of genera. Algebraic numbers and their basic properties, Kummer"s work on Fermat"s last theorem. Unique factorization of ideals in algebraic number fields, Class group and class number, Ramification of primes. Discriminant, Norms of ideals, Reciprocity laws, Cyclotomic fields and Kronecker-Weber theorem (statement only). Introduction to class field theory. 

;MA 501, MA 509;J.W. Cassels, Local Fields, Cambridge Press, 1986. 
J.W. Cassels and A. Frohiich, Algebraic Number Theory, Academic Press, 1967. 
H.M. Edwards, Fermat"s Last Theorem, Springer-Verlag, 1977. 
K. Ireland and M. Rosen, A Classical Introduction to Modern Number Theory, 2nd ed., Springer-Verlag, 1990. 
S. Lang, Algebraic Number Theory, Addison-Wesley, 1970. 
D.A. Marcus, Number Fields, Springer-Verlag, 1977. 
;;
MA 503; Integration on chains. Stokes"theorem. Differential manifolds, tangent spaces, differentiable maps, immersions, Whitney"s embedding theorem, manifolds with boundary, transversality, intersection theory mod 2. Differential forms, de Rham cohomology, orientability of manifolds and wedge product pairings. 

;MA 404;W. Rudin, Principles of Mathematical Analysis, McGraw-Hill, 1976. 
V. Guillemin and A. Pollack, Differential Topology, Prentice-Hall, 1974. 
M.W. Hirsch, Differential Topology, Springer-Verlag, 1976. 
;;
MA 504;Normed spaces. Continuity of linear maps. Hahn-Banach theorems. Banach spaces. Uniform boundedness principles. Closed graph and open mapping theorems. Duals and transposes. Weak and weak-star convergence. 

;MA 403;B.V. Limaye, Functional Analysis, 2nd ed., Wiley Eastern, 1996. 
K. Yoshida, Functional Analysis, Springer-Verlag, 1965. 
G. Goffman and G. Pedrick, First Course in Functional Analysis, Prentice-Hall, 1974. 
A. Taylor and D. Lay, Introduction to Functional Analysis, Wiley, 1980. 
J.B. Conway, A Course in Functional Analysis, Springer-Verlag, 1985. 
;;
AE 640;Introduction. General requirements. Types of landing gears, advantages and disadvantages. Actuating Systems. Airworthiness requirements. 

Design cases. Shock absorbers. Testing of landing gears. 
;Nil;P.D. Desai, Preliminary Design Considerations for Landing Gear Layout, IIT Bombay, 1987. 
Aircraft Landing Gear Design, Principles and Practices, N.S.Currey, AIAA Education Series, 1988 
;;
MA 505;Positive operators and Korovkin"s theorem, Bernstein polynomials, Fejer"s theorem, Stone-Weierstrass theorem. Classical Chebyshev theory, discretization and discrete best approximation, the algorithms of Remes. Degree of approximation, moduli of continuity and K-functionals, direct and converse theorems. Hermite-Birkhoff interpolation, piecewise polynomial interpolation. Best approximation in normed linear spaces. 

;MA 403;G.G. Lorentz, Approximation of Functions, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 
E.W. Cheney, Introduction to Approximation Theory, McGraw-Hill, 1966. 
P.J. Laurent, Approximation et Optimisation, Hermann, 1972. 
I. Singer, The Theory of Best Approximation and Functional Analysis, CBMS Lecture Notes, No. 13, SIAM, 1974. ;;
MA 506;Rings and modules, localization, Noetherian rings, primary decomposition, Artinian rings, integral extensions, Hilbert"s Nullstellensatz, Noether"s normalization, valuation rings, Dedekind domains, Dimensions Theorem, Completions. 

;MA 501;O. Zariski and P. Samuel, Commutative Algebra, Vols. I and II, Van Nostrand, 1958 and 1960. 
M.F. Atiyah and I.G. Macdonald, Introduction to Commutative Algebra, Addison-Wesley, 1969. 
N.S. Gopalakrishnan, Commutative Algebra, Oxonian Press, 1984. 
N. Jacobson, Basic Algebra, Vol. II, Hindustan Publishing Corporation, 1984. 
D. Eisenbud, Commutative Algebra : With a View Towards Algebraic Geometry, Springer-Verlag, 1995. 
;;
MA 507;Convex sets, convex cones and convex functions. Continuity and growth properties of convex functions. Conjugate convex functions in paired spaces. Subgradients, normal cones and subdifferential formulae. 

Convex optimization. Constraint qualifications and Kuhn-Tucker theory. Lagrangian duality. Applications to nonlinear programming. 

Chebyshev approximation. Calculus of variation and partial differential equations. Dubovitski-Milyutin theory. 

;MA 404;R.T. Rockafellar, Convex Analysis, Princeton University Press, 1959. 
R.T. Rockafellar, Conjugate Duality and Optimization, CBMS Lecture Notes, Series No. 13 SIAM, 1974. 
P.J. Laurent, Approximation et Optimization, Hermann, 1973. 
M.S. Bazaraa and C.M. Shetty, Foundations of Optimizations, Lecture Notes in Economics and Management Systems, Springer-Verlag, 1976. 
;;
MA 508;Category theory : Categories and functors, natural transformations, adjoints, universal objects. Review of homotopy and fundamental groups. Covering spaces : path lifting, homotopy lifting property, universal covering spaces; relation with fundamental group. 

Computation of fundamental group : Van-Kampen"s theorem. 

Simplicial complexes : Homology of chain complexes, Simplicial approximation theorem; edge path groupoid. 

Homology: Simplicial and singular homology, Brouwer"s fixed point theorem and invariance of domain. 

Cohomology ring : Structure of mod 2 cohomology of projective spaces. 

Statement of the de Rham theorem. 

;MA 402, MA 406;S. Greenberg, Lectures on Algebraic Topology, Benjamin, 1967. 
P. Hilton and S. Wylie, Homology Theory, An Introduction to Algebraic Topology, Cambridge University Press, 1967. 
J.R. Munkres, Elements of Algebriac Topology, Addison-Wesley, 1984. ;;
MA 509; Divisibility, Primes, Unique factorization of integers, Congruence, Chinese remainder theorem, Arithmetical functions, Mobius inversion, Quadratic reciprocity, Diophantine equations, Fermat"s two square theorem, Lagrange"s four square theorem, Waring"s problem. Dirichlet"s theorem on primes in arithmetic progression. Geometry of numbers, Minkowski"s theorem. Prime number theorem. 

;NIL;W.W. Adams and L.J. Goldstein, Introduction to the Theory of Numbers, 3rd ed., Wiley Eastern, 1972. 
A. Baker, A Concise Introduction to the Theory of Numbers, Cambridge University Press, 1984. 
G.H. Hardy and E.M. Wright, An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers, 4th ed., Clarendon Press, 1960. 
K. Ireland and M. Rosen, A Classicial Introduction to Modern Number Theory, Springer-Verlag, 1982. 
I. Niven and H.S. Zuckerman, Introduction to the Theory of Numbers, 3rd ed., Springer-Verlag, 1982. 
J.P. Serre, A Course in Arithmetic, Narosa, 1979. 
;;
MA 510;Affine and projective varieties, coordinate rings, Rational functions and local rings, singular points and tangent lines, Rational parametrization, Branches and valuations, Intersection multiplicity, Bezout"s theorem for plane curves, Max Noether"s theorem. Varieties, morphisms and rational maps. Resolution of singularities of curves. 

;MA 501;S.S. Abhyankar, Algebraic Geometry for Scientists and Engineers, American Mathematical Society, 1990. 
W. Fulton, Algebraic Curves, Benjamin, 1969. 
M. Reid, Undergraduate Algebraic Geometry, Cambridge University Press, 1990. 
I.R. Shafarevich, Basic Algebraic Geometry, Springer-Verlag, 1974. 
R.J. Walker, Algebraic Curves, Springer-Verlag, 1950. 
J. Harris, Algebraic Geometry : A First Course, Springer-Verlag, 1992. 
;;
MA 511; Basic Combinatorial Objects : Sets, multisets, partitions of sets, partitions of numbers, finite vector spaces, permutations, graphs etc. 

Basic Counting Coefficients: The twelve fold way, binomial, q-binomial and the Stirling coefficients, permutation statistics, etc. 

Sieve Methods : Principle of inclusion-exclusion, permutations with restricted positions, Sign-reversing involutions, determinants etc. 

Introduction to combinatorial reciprocity. Introduction to symmetric functions. 

;MA 401,  MA 402;R.P. Stanley, Enumerative Combinatorics, Vol. I, Wadsworth and Brooks/Cole, 1986. 
C. Berge, Principles of Combinatorics, Academic Press, 1972. 
K.D. Joshi, Foundations of Discrete Mathematics, Wiley Eastern, 1989. 
;;
MA 512;Partially ordered sets, Mobius inversion. 

Rational generating functions: P-partitions and linear Diophantine equations. 

Polya theory and representation theory of the symmetric group: Combinatorial algorithms, and symmetric functions. 

Generating functions : Single and multivariable Lagrange inversion. 

;MA 511;R.P. Stanley, Enumerative Combinatorics, Vol. I, Wadsworth and Brooks/Cole, 1986. 
B.E. Sagan, The Symmetric Group: Representations,Combinatorial Algorithms and Symmetric Functions, Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole, 1991. 
M. Aigner, Combinatorial Theory, Springer-Verlag, 1979. 
;;
MA 513;Revision of Fourier series. Tests for pointwise convergence of Fourier series. Summability of Fourier series for integrable functions. 

Fourier-transforms of integrable functions. Basic properties of Fourier transforms. Inversion theorem, Plancheral theorem, Paley-Weiner theorem. 

;MA 408;Ganapathy Iyer, Mathematical Analysis, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1977. 
W. Rudin, Real and Complex Analysis, Tata McGraw-Hill, 3rd ed., 1987. 
W. Rudin, Functional Analysis, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1973. ;;
MA 514;Locally convex spaces and their metrizability. Frechet spaces. Weak topologies. Test function spaces. Calculus with distributions. 

Localization. Distributions as derivatives. Convolutions. Fourier transforms. Tempered distributions.Paley-Wiener theorems. Sobolev"s lemma. Fundamental solutions of partial differential equations. 

Elliptic equations. 

;MA 406, MA 408;W. Rudin, Functional Analysis, McGraw-Hill, 1973. 
K. Yoshida, Functional Analysis, Academic Press, 1965. 
L. Hormander, The Analysis of Linear PDE, Vols. I and II, Springer-Verlag, 1983. 
;;
MA 515;Graphs, subgraphs and contractions. Menger"s Theorem. 2-connection. 

Alternating paths. Algebraic Duality. Polynomials associated with graphs. Planarity. Matroids. 

;NIL;W.T. Tutte, Graph Theory, Cambrdige University Press, 1985. 
K.R. Parthasarathy, Basic Graph Theory, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1994. 
;;
MA 516;Symmetric and self-adjoint operators. Unitary operators and Cayley transforms. Banach algebras. Gelfand-Naimark theory for commutative B-star algebras. 

Spectral representation of bounded/unbounded self-adjoint oprators and the associated functional calculus. One parameter group of operators and Stone"s theorem. Semigroups of self-adjoint operators. 

Collectively compact sets of operators, their properties and application to spectral theory in Banach spaces. Totally bounded sets of compact operators. 

;MA 517;F. Riesz and B.Z. Nagy, Functional Analysis, Blackie, 1956. 
A. Taylor and D. Lay, Introduction to Functional Analysis, 2nd ed., Wiley, 1980. 
P.M. Anselone, Collectively Compact Operator Approximation Theory, Prentice-Hall, 1971. 
;;
MA 517;Bounded operators on Hilbert spaces : adjoint operators, normal, unitary and self-adjoint operators and their spectra, numerical ranges. Spectral theorem for compact self-adjoint operators and its application to Sturm-Liouville problems. Unbounded operators. 

;MA 404;B.V. Limaye, Functional Analysis, 2nd ed., Wiley Eastern, 1996. 
K.Y. Yoshida, Functional Analysis, Springer-Verlag, 1965. 
G. Goffman and G. Pedrick, First Course in Functional Analysis, Prentice Hall, 1974.
D.H. Griffel, Applied Functional Analysis, Ellis Horwood Ltd., Wiley, 1981. 
;;
MA 518;Resolvent sets and spectra of bounded and compact operators in Banach spaces. Spectral projection, reduced resolvent and the nilpotent operator. Neumann expansion and the analyticity of spectral projctions. Rayleigh-Schrodinger series and the iterative computation of eigenelements. Numerical approximation by methods related to projections and by quadrature methods. Algorithms for computing eigenelements and their computational feasibility. 

;MA 517;T. Kato, Perturbation Theory of Linear Operators, 2nd ed.,Springer-Verlag, 1980. 
F. Chatelin, Spectral Approximation of Linear Operators, Academic Press, 1983. 
B.V. Limaye, Spectral Perturbation and Approximation with Numerical Experiments, Proc. Centre Math. Anal. Vol. 13, Australian National Univ., 1987. 
;;
MA 519;Representations, Subrepresentations, Tensor products, Symmetric and Alternating Squares. 

Characters, Schur"s lemma, Orthogonality relations, Decomposition of regular representation, Number of irreducible representations, canonical decomposition and explicit decompositions. Subgroups, Product groups, Abelian groups. Induced representations. 

Examples : Cyclic groups, alternating and symmetric groups. 

Integrality properties of characters, Burnside p q theorem. The character of induced reporesentation, Frobenius Reciprocity Theory, Meckey"s irreducibility criterion, Examples of induced representations, Representations of supersolvable groups. 

;MA 402;J.P. Serre, Linear Representation of Groups, Springer-Verlag, 1977. 
N. Jacobson, Basic Algebra II, Hindustan Publishing Corproation, 1983. 
M. Burrow, Representation Theory of Finite Groups, Academic Press, 1965. 
S. Lang, Algebra, Addison-Wesley, 1965. 
;;
MA 520;Piecewise linear approximation. Piecewise cubic interpolation. Cubic spline interpolation and its errors. Representation of piecewise polynomial diminishing splines. Interpolating and smoothing splines. 

Approximate representation of linear functions. Optimal quadratures. 

Variational formulation of generalized splines. Surface approximation by tensor product splines. The Rayleigh-Ritz-Galerkin procedures of elliptic problems, Semi-discrete Galerkin procedure for parabolic problems. 

;MA 403;C. de Boor, A Practical Guide to Splines, Springer-Verlag, 1978. 
M.H. Schultz, Spline Analysis, Prentice-Hall, 1973. 
P.J. Laurent, Approximation et Optimization, Hermann, 1972. 
;;
MA 521;Open mapping property of analytic functions,mean value property of harmonic functions, Poisson integral representation of harmonic functions, Schwarz lemma and Phragmen-Lindelof method. Approximation by rational functions. Riemann mapping theorem, simply and doubly connected domains. 

;MA 403, MA 405;W. Rudin, Real and Complex Analysis, Tata McGraw-Hill, 3rd ed., 1987. 
E. Hille, Analytic Function Theory, I and II, Blaisdell, 1959. 
;;
AE 642;Thermomechanical behaviour of polymer composites. Micromechanical modelling of continuous fibre composites. Interlaminar response of composite materials. Fracture and fracture mechanics of composites. 

Notched composites. Typical composite design studies. 

Polymer composite fabrication technology. Joining, machining and repair of composites. Ablation. Environmental degradation of composites. Advanced composites characterisation. Impact. Textile composites. Applications of composites. 
;AE 673 or equivalent;
K.T. Kedward and J.M. Whitney, Design Studies - Volume 5, Technomic Publishing Co., Inc. 1990. 
M.G. Bader et. al. Processing and Fabrication Technology, Volume 3, Technomic Publishing Co-Inc. 1990. 
Engineered Materials Handbook - Volume 1, Composites, ASM International, 1989 
K. Friedrich (ed), Application of Fracture Mechanics to Composite Materials - Volume 6, Elsevier, 1989. 
L.M. Phillips (ed), Design with Advanced Composite Materials, Springer - Verlag, 1989. 
S.W. Tsai (ed), Composites Design, Think Composites, 1988. 
;;
MA 541;General Introduction to computational methods, similarity transformations and applications to boundary layer flows. Computational methods for boundary value problems involving O.D.E., explicit and implicit methods for solving unsteady flows, method of characteristics for hyperbolic equations. Upwind differencing and artificial viscosity, numerical solutions of biharmonic equations, numerical methods for solving problems involving subsonic, supersonic and transonic flows. 

;MA 407,MA 410, MA 41;C.Y. Chow, An Introduction to Computational Fluid Mechanics, Wiley, 1979. 
M. Holt, Numerical Methods in Fluid Mechanics, Springer-Verlag, 1977. ;;
MA 543;The fundamentals of finite element method. The shape functions, Ritz and Galerkin finite element formulations. Finite element formulation for Laplace, wave and diffusion equations. 

;NIL;J.N. Reddy, Finite Element Method, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, 1993. 
D.H. Norrie and G. DeVries, Introduction to Finite Element Method Analysis, Academic Press, 1957. 
;;
MA 545;Compressible fluid flow: Thermodynamics and physical properties of gases. Sound waves. One dimensional flows. Sub-sonic, transonic, super-sonic and hypersonic flows. Shock conditions and propagation of shock waves. Self-similar flows. 

Methods: characteristics, hodograph, simple waves, perturbation. 

Boundary layer flows in incompressible fluids: Boundary layer approximations. 
;MA 412, MA 410, MA 4;R. Von. Mises, Mathematical Theory of Compressible Fluid Flow, Academic Press, 1958. 
N. Curle and N.J. Davis, Modern Fluid Dynamics, Vol. 2, Van Nostrand, 1971. 
H. Schlichting, Boundary Layer Theory, McGraw-Hill, 1979. 
;;
MA 547;Integral transforms of Fourier, Laplace, Hankel and Mellin. Fredholm and Volterra integral equations and the iterative solutions. Fredholm alternative, Symmetric kernels and singular integral equations. 

;MA 410;I.N. Sneddon, Fourier Transforms, McGraw-Hill, 1951. 
I.N. Sneddon, The Use of Integral Transforms, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1974. 
S.G. Mikhlin, Integral Equations, Pergamon Press, 1957. 
A.C. Pipkin, A Course on Integral Equations, Springer-Verlag, 1991. 
;;
MA 549;Theory of distributions. Boundary value problems. Spectral theory of second-order ordinary differential operators. Linear Integral equations. Singular integral equations and partial differential equations. 

;MA 401, MA 403;R.K. Bose and M.C. Joshi, Methods of Mathematical Physics, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1984. 
R. Courant and D. Hilbert, Methods of Mathematical Physics, Interscience, 1966. 
B. Friedman, Principles and Techniques of Applied Mathematics, Wiley, 1956. 
I. Stakgold, Boundary Value Problems of Mathematical Physics, Vols I and II, The MacMillan Co., 1968. 
;;
MA 551;Boundary value problems for ordinary differential equations: finite difference and shooting methods. 

Elliptic equations: discrete maximum principle and stability, ADI and LOD methods. Finite difference schemes for initial and boundary value problems: Lax-Ritchmyer equivalence theorem. Stability: matrix, Von Neumann and energy methods. 

Explicit, implicit (Euler Backward and Crank-Nicolson) methods for parabolic equations: Lax-Wendroff Scheme, Leapfrog method, CFL conditions 

;MA 407;K.E. Atkinson, An Introduction to Numerical Analysis, Wiley, 1989. 
A.R. Mitchell and S.D.F. Griffiths, The Finite Difference Methods in Partial Differential Equations, Wiley, 1980. 
G.D. Smith, Numerical Solution of Partial Differential Equations. Finite Difference Methods, 3rd ed., Calrendorn Press Oxford, 1985. 
R.D. Ritchmyer and K.W. Morton, Difference Methods for Initial Value Problems, Interscience, Wiley, 1969. 
;;
MA 553;Test functions and distributions, Fourier transform and tempered distributions. Elements of Sobolev spaces, approximation by smooth functions, trace and imbedding results. Existence and regularity of weak solutions of elliptic equations, eigenvalue problem. Semilinear elliptic equations: monotone iteration, Galerkin methods, Variational methods and mountain pass theorem. 

;MA 403, MA 405, MA 4;S. Kesavan, Topics in Functional Analysis and Applications, Wiley Eastern, 1989. 
M.C. Joshi and R.K. Bose, Some Topics in Nonlinear Functional Analysis, Wiley Eastern, 1985. 
L. Nirenberg, Variational Topological Methods in Nonlinear Problems, Bull (New Series) of AMS and No.3, 267-302, 1985. 
;;
MA 555;Review of basic concepts of stress strain equilibrium equations. 

Torsion of cylindrical bars, simple solutions of the torsion problems. 

Plane problems in cartesian and polar coordinates. Bending of a plate. 

Axisymmetric problems. 

;MA 410,MA 414, MA 41;I.S. Sokolnikoff, Mathematical Theory of Elasticity, McGraw-Hill, 1977. 
S. Timoshenko and J.N. Goodiere, Theory of Elasticity, McGraw-Hill, 1970. 
;;
MA 571;Conditional probability, conditional expectation, Martingales, semi-Martingales, Kolmogorov"s existence theorem, stationary processes. 

;MA 422;P. Billingsley, Probability and Measure, 2nd ed., Wiley, 1986. 
L. Breiman, Probability, Addison-Wesley, 1968. 
J.L. Doob, Stochastic Processes, Wiley, 1953. 
;;
MA 573;Coherent Structures, Reliability of systems of independent components, Bounds of system reliability, shape of the system reliability function,notion of ageing, parametric families of life distributions with monotone failure rate, classes of life distributions based on notions of ageing, classes of distributions in replacement policies, limit distributions for series and parallel systems. Statistical estimation and testing for popular reliability models and classes (parametric and nonparametric). 

;MA 418, MA 422;R.E. Barlow and F. Proschan, Statitsical Theory of Reliability and Life Testing, Holt, Reinhart and Winston, 1975. 
J.F. Lawless, Statistical Models and Methods of Life Time Data, Wiley, 1982. 
R.G. Miller, Survival Analysis, Wiley, 1981. 
L.J. Bain, Statistical Analysis of Reliability and Life Testing, Marcel Dekker, 1978. 
N.R. Mann, R.E. Shafer and N.D. Singpurwala, Methods of Statistical Analysis of Reliability and Life Data, Wiley, 1974. 
J.D. Kalbfleisch and R.L. Prentice, The Statistical Analysis of Failure Time Data, Wiley, 1986. 
;;
MA 575;K-variate normal distribution. Estimation of the mean vector and dispersion matrix. Random sampling from multivariate normal distribution. Multivariate distribution theory. Discriminant and canonical analysis. Factor analysis. Principal components. 

Distribution theory associated with the analysis. 

;MA 418, MA 422;T.W. Anderson, An Introduction to Multivariate Statistical Analysis, Wiley, 1984. 
A.M. Kshirsagar, Multivariate Analysis, Vols. I to IV, North Holland, 1977. 
M.S. Srivastava and E.M. Carter, An Introduction to Multivariate Statistics, North Holland, 1983. 

;;
MA 577;Point estimation. Cramer-Rao inequality, Bhattacharya bounds. 

Sufficient estimators, Rao-Blackwell theorem. Maximum likelihood and other methods of estimation. Tests and statistical hypothesis. 

Critical region. Power, Neyman-Pearson lemmas. Likelihood ratio principle. MP, UMP, LMPU tests, similar tests. 

Statistical decision theory. Loss function. Risk functions. 

Admissibility. Bayes and minimax solutions. Randomized decision functions. Sequential decision rules. Sequential analysis. 

;MA 418, MA 422;C.R. Rao, Linear Statistical Inference and its Applications, Wiley Eastern, 1974. 
M.G. Kendall and A. Stuart, The Advanced Theory of Statistics, Vol. II, Griffin, 1966. 
E.L. Lehmann, Testing Statistical Hypotheses, 2nd ed., Wiley, 1986. 
G. Casella and R.L. Berger, Statistical Inference, Wadsworth and Brooks, 1990. 
;;
MA 579;Recurrent events. Renewal theory. Random walk. Markov chains and Markov processes. Stationary processes. Spectral Analysis. Stochastic calculus. Branching phenomena. Semi-Markov processes. Systems with random inputs. 

;MA 422;D.R. Cox and H.D. Miller, The Theory of Stochastic Processes, Methuen, 1970. 
E. Parzen, Stochastic Processes, Holden-Day, 1972. 
R.O. Howard, Dynamic Probabilistic Systems, Vol. 1 and 2, Wiley, 1971. 
S.K. Srinivasan and K. Mehta, Stochastic Processes, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1976. 
J. Medhi, Stochastic Processes, Wiley Eastern, 1982. 
S. Karlin and H.M. Taylor, A First Course in Stochastic Processes, Academic Press, 1975. 
;;
MA 540;Monotone operators. Fixed point theorems. Degree theory and condensing operators. Sobolov spaces. Elliptic Boundary value problems. 

Semi-group theory. Applications to integral and integro-differential equations. 

;MA 404;M.C. Joshi and R.K. Bose, Some Topics in Nonlinear Functional Analysis, Wiley Eastern, 1985. 
S. Kesavan, Topics in Functional Analysis and Applications, Wiley Eastern, 1989. 
E. Zeilder, Nonlinear Functional Analysis and its Application, Springer-Verlag. 
;;
AE 652;  Introduction to gas turbine engine  layout. Perspective development and  general guidelines for component design analysis with consideration to lifing. 
Material consideration : elastic-plastic behaviour, high/low cycle fatigue and creep. Vibration problems in gas turbine engines. Rotor dynamics, Bearings, seals and lubrication consideration. ; Nil;G.S. Skubachevskii, Aircraft Gas Turbine Engines. Construction & Design of parts, Mashinostroenie, Moscow 1981, in Russian. 
G.W.Meetham, The Development of Gas Turbine Materials, Applied Science Publishers Ltd., London (U.K.) 1981. 
George E. Dieter, Mechanical Metallurgy, Third Ed., McGraw Hill Book Co., 1986 
;;
MA 542;The history of biomedicine - a brief review. Overall description of the human body. Physical, chemical and rheological properties of blood. The dynamics of the circulatory system. The human thermal sytems. Modelling the body as compartments, sources, and streams. 

Transport through cell membranes. Artificial kidney devices. 

Artificial heart-lung devices. 

;MA 412, MA 416;David O. Cooney, Biomedical Engineering Principles : An Introduction to Fluid Heat and Mass Transport Processes, Marcel Dekker, 1976. 
Y.C. Fung, Biomechanics: Mechanical Properties of Living Tissues, Springer-Verlag, 1981. 
E.N. Lightfoot, Transport Phenomenon in Living Systems, Wiley, 1974. 
;;
MA 544;Mathematical theories of brittle fracture. Linear elastic fracture mechanics. Crack-border stress fields and stress intensity factors. 

Two-dimensional crack problems. 

;MA 414, MA 416, MA 5;H. Liebowitz, Fracture, Vol. 2, Mathematical Fundamentals, Academic Press, 1968. 
I.N. Sneddon and H. Lowengrub, Crack Problems in the Classical Theory of Elasticity, Wiley, 1969 
;;
MA 546;Motion of charged particles in electromagnetic fields, adiabatic invariants, electric currents in an ionized gas, magnetic field pressure, conduction and diffusion in ionized gases, electromagnetic waves and radiation in plasmas, macroscopic equations of plasma and fluid model, criteria for applicability of a fluid description, hydro-magnetics, hydromagnetic flows. ;MA 412, MA 416;G.W. Sutton and A. Sherman, Engineereing Magnetohydrodynamics, McGraw-Hill, 1965. 
T.J.M. Boyd and J.J. Sanderson, Plasma Dynamics, Thomas Nelson, 1969. 
C.L. Longmire, Elementary Plasma Physics, Wiley Eastern, 1971. ;;
AE 654; Introduction, various propulsive devices used for aerospace applications, classifications of rockets and applications. Nozzle Design: flow through real nozzle, equilibrium and frozen flow, adaptive and non-adaptive nozzles, thrust vector control s rocket performance parameters. 

Solid propellant rockets: grain composition, design of grain. 

Liquid propellant rocks: Injector design, cooling system, feed systems. Integrated ram-rocket 

;Nil;Sutton, S.P. Rocket Propulsion Elements, John Wiley, 1954. 
Barrere, M. et. al., Rocket propulsion, Elsevier, London, 1966. 
Oates G.C. Aerothermodynamics of Gas Turbine and Rocket Propulsion, AIAA, 1988. 
;;
MA 548;Introduction to non-Newtonian Fluids. Constitutive equations. 

Classification of fluids. Flow of different non-Newtonian fluids (Casson, Power Law, Bingham, Viscoelastic, Herschel Bulkley) through various geometries (uniform circular tubes, elliptic tubes, non-uniform tubes, viscometric flows, etc.). Unsteady flows, Boundary Layer flow. 

Stability, Application (lubrication, blood flow etc.). 
;MA 412, MA 416;A.H.P. Skeland, Non-Newtonian Flow and Heat Transfer, Wiley, 1967. 
J.N. Kapur, B.S. Bhatt and N.C. Sacheti, Non-Newtonian Fluid Flows, Pragati Prakashan, 1982. 
G. Astarita and G. Marucci, Principles of Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics, McGraw-Hill, 1974. ;;
MA 550;Semigroup of bounded linear operators and their generators. 

Hille-Yosida and Lumere-Phillips theorems, characterisation of the generators, compact semigroups, analytic semigroups. Abstract Cauchy problem: existence, uniqueness and regularity of mild solutions, asymptotic behaviour. Theory of semilinear evolution equations and applications to Schrodinger equation, nonlinear heat and Kolv equation. 
;MA 404;A. Pazy, Semigroups of Linear Operator and Applications to PDEs, Springer-Verlag, Appl. Maths. Sci. 44, 1983. 
S. Kesavan, Topics in Functional Analysis and Applications, Wiley Eastern, 1989. 
;;
MA 552;MA 416 (Exposure) Basic differential equations. Incompressible Lubrication. One dimensional bearings. Finite bearings. Hydrodynamic gas bearing. 

Dynamic loading. Hydrostatic bearings. Instability. 

Elastohydrodynamic lubrication. Inertia and turbulence effects. 
;MA 414, MA 416;O. Pinkus and B. Sternlicht, Theory of Hydrodynamical Lubrication, McGraw-Hill, 1961. 
G.W. Stachowiak and A.W. Batchelor, Engineering Tribology, Elsevier Science Publishers, 1993. 
;;
MA 554;Minimization of convex functionals: Fundamental theorem, variational formulation of a minimization problem, projections on convex sets. 

Variational inequalities : Fundamental theorem, minimization of convex functionals, Gateaux derivatives and subdifferentials. Variational problem in one dimension: The obstacle problem. 

Quasivariational problems : The K-K-M lemma and the Fan lemma. Fixed point theorems of Brouwer, Schauder and Tychonov. Multivalued applications. 

;MA 404;C. Baiocchi and A. Capelo, Variational and Quasivariational Inequalities, Wiley, 1984. 
I. Ekeland and R. Temam, Analyse Convexe et Problemes Variationnels, Dunod/Gautheir-Villars, 1974. 
;;
MA 570;Theory of linear estimation. Standard designs : CRD, RBD, LSD, BIBD and PBIBD. Factorial designs. Confounding. Missing plot technique. Analysis of covariance. Construction and nonexistence theory. Special designs : Split-plots, strip-plots, cross-over designs. 

;MA 401,MA 577;O. Kempthorne, Design and Analysis of Experiments, Wiley Eastern, 1967. 
M.C. Chakrabarty, Mathematics of Design and Analysis of Experiments, Asia Publishing House, 1962. 
M.N. Das and N.C. Giri, Design and Analysis of Experiments, Wiley Eastern, 1979. 
A. Dey, Theory of Block Designs, Wiley, 1986. ;;
MA 572;The empirical distribution and its basic properties. Location and scale parameters. Estimation and Testing in one sample problem. 

Asymptotic Relative Efficiency. 

Testing, many sample problems (Tests for Independence, Equality of distribution function, etc.). 
;MA 577;M. Hollandor, and D.A. Wolfe, Nonparametric Statistical Inference, McGraw-Hill, 1973. 
E.L. Lehmann, Nonparametric Statistical Methods Based on Ranks, McGraw-Hill, 1975. 
J.W. Pratt, and J.D. Gibbons, Concepts of Nonparametric Theory, Springer-Verlag, 1981. ;;
ES 605;;;;;
ES 612;;;;;
MA 574;Multiple linear regression-estimation, tests and confidence regions. 

Checks for normality assumptions, outliers and influential observations. Transformations, variable selection. Identifiability and ill-conditioning (multi-collinearity), transformations. 

;MA 577;G.A.F. Seber and Wild, C.J., Nonlinear Regression, Wiley, 1989. 
A. Sen and M. Srivastava, Regression Analysis-Theory, Methods and Applications, Springer-Verlag, 1990. 
D.C. Montgomery and E.A. Peck, Introduction to Linear Regression Analysis, Wiley, 1982. ;;
MA 576;Decision functions, Risk functions, utility and subjective probability, Randomization, Optimal decision rules. Admissibility and completeness, Existence of Bayes Decision Rules, Existence of a Minimal complete class, Essential completeness of the class of nonrandomized rules. The minimax theorem. 

Invariant statistical decision problems. Multiple decision problems. 

Sequential decision problems. 

;MA 577;J.O. Berger, Statistical Decision Theory : Foundations, Concepts and Methods, Springer-Verlag, 1980. 
T.S. Ferguson, Mathematical Statistics, Academic Press, 1967. 
;;
MA 578;UMPU, Invariance, Asymptotic Theory of Estimation, efficiency, super-efficiency, properties of m.l.e., asymptotic distribution of likelihood ratio statistics. 

;MA 577;L. LeCam, Asymptotic Methods in Statistical Decision Theory, Springer-Verlag, 1986. 
E.L. Lehmann, Theory of Point Estimation, Wiley, 1983. 
E.L. Lehmann, Testing Statistical Hypothesis, 2nd ed., Wiley, 1986. 
R.J. Serfling, Approximation Theorems of Mathematical Statistics, Wiley, 1980;;
MA 580;Introduction to autocorrelation function, linear stationary models like autoregressive, integrated moving average processes. Forecasting model identification including initial estimates of the parameters, model multiplicity etc. Model estimation, model diagnostic checking. Case studies. Computational experiments. 

;MA 577;C. Chatfield, The Analysis of Time Series: An Introduction, Chapman & Hall, 1984. 
G.E.P. Box and G.M. Jenkins, Time Series Analysis Forecasting and Control, Holden-Day, 1976. 
P.J. Brockwell and R.A. Davis, Time Series, Springer-Verlag, 1987. ;;
AE 656; Introduction, Various fuels, solid, liquid and gaseous fuels, Aviation fuels requirements and specifications. Chemical thermo-dynamics, Laws of thermodynamics applied to reacting systems. Equilibrium composition, Adiabatic flame temperature. Chemical kinetics, Reaction rates, Gas phase reactions, Surface reactions. Combustion : Premixed and diffusion flames, Laminar and turbulent flames, Flame velocities, Flame propagation theories, Diffusion flame, Droplet Combustion. Application to gas turbine combustor and rocket engine. 
;Nil; K.K. Kuo, Principles of Combustion, Wiley International, 1986. 
S.P. Sharma and C. Mohan, Fuels and Combustion, Tata McGraw Hill, 1984. 
F.A. Williams, Combustion Theory, John Wiley, 1965.
A.G. Gaydon and Wolthart, Flames, Chapman Hall, 1979.;;
SI 401;  Floating point round-off analysis. Linear independence. Dimension. Rank of a matrix. Vector and matrix norms. 
Linear Systems : Overdetermined, underdetermined and nonsingular systems. Condition of a system. LU decomposition and Gauss elimination. 

Pivoting and scaling strategies. QR factorization and Householder orthogonalization. Stability. Least square solution. Generalized inverse. Iterative improvement of a solution. 

Eigenvalue Problems : Cayley-Hamilton theorem. Discussion of canonical forms. Diagonalization of symmetric matrices. Quadratic forms and their relation to eigenvalue problems. Sensitivity of eigenvalues and eigenvectors to perturbation. Location of eigenvalues. Gershgorin"s theorem. Power and inverse power methods. Rayleigh quotient iteration. 

Simultaneous orthogonalization and QR method. 

Exposure to software packages like Mathematica, IMSL, Matlab, Gauss, LAPACK. 
;;G. E. Forsythe and C. B. Moler, Computer Solution of Linear Algebraic Systems, Prentice Hall, 1967. 
B. Noble and J. W. Daniel, Applied Linear Algebra, 2nd ed., Prentice Hall, 1977. 
G. W. Stewart, Introduction to Matrix Computations, Academic Press, 1973. 
D. S. Watkins, Fundamentals of Matrix Computation, Wiley, 1991. 
;;
SI 402;Polynomial interpolation. Piecewise polynomial and cubic spline interpolation. Least square approximation. Numerical integration : various rules and their composite versions. Numerical differentiation. 
Methods for single non-linear equation. Bisection and secant methods. 

Newton"s method: convergence and rate of convergence. System of equations. 

Numerical solution of ordinary differential equations. Euler method. 

Runge-Kutta and multi-step methods. Predictor-corrector method. 

Exposure to software packages like Mathematica, Matlab, IMSL Subroutines. 
;;S. D. Conte and Carl de Boor, Elementary Numerical Analysis - An Algorithmic Approach, McGraw-Hill, 1981. 
K. E. Atkinson, An Introduction to Numerical Analysis, Wiley, 1989. 
F. B. Hildebrand, Introduction to Numerical Analysis, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1974. 
;;
SI 403;Dimensional analysis and scaling, model error approximation and testing, data translation. 
Fundamentals of modeling : Lagrange and Eulerian models. Basic conservation laws. Stress, strain and strain rate. Constitutive equations. 

Growth and Decay models : population growth (Lofka-Volterra model), bacteria growth and decay. Radiation and crystal growth. 

Interacting species and chemical reactions. Satellite problem. 

Network analysis : Mechanical models, Electrical network. Fluid flow including blood flow problems, traffic flow. 

Diffusion and air pollution models. 

;;M. Braun, C. S. Coleman and D. A. Draw, 
Differential Equation Models, Modules in Applied Mathematics, Vol. 1, Springer Verlag, 1978.
C. L. Dym and E. S. Ivey, Principles of 
Mathematical Modeling, Academic Press, 1980.
A. Friedman, Mathematics in Industrial 
Problems, Part 1-9, MA Series, Springer-
Verlag, 1991.
Y. C. Fung, Biomechanics, Springer- Verlag, 1981.
J. Keener and J. Sneyd, Mathematical
Physiology, Springer-Verlag, 1998.
M.S. Klamkin (ed.), Mathematical Modelling.Class Room Notes in Applied Mathematics, SIAM, 1987.
E. N. Lightfoot, Transport Phenomenon and Living Systems, John Wiley & Sons, 
1974.
H. J. White and S. Tauber, System Analysis, W.B. Saunders Company, 1969.;;
AE 659; Optimisation concepts in real cycles of mixed and unmixed turbofan engines; Selection of propulsion system for mission performance constraint and mission analysis, ON and OFF Design Performance, Optimal selection of Engine cycle. Aircraft Engine sizing : Gas Flow Path layout optimisation for Gas Generator Module - HPC + MB + HPT; Turbofan Module - Fan + LPC + LPT ; Interface matching concepts and trends. Burner Design Tools. Aircraft engine weight estimation : concepts and tools. 
;Nil;Mattingly J.D. Aircraft Engine Design AIAA Series, 1987. 
Sane S.K. Aircraft Engine Selection and Sizing (Lecture Notes), 1996
Onat, E., A method to estimate weight and dimensions of aircraft engines, 
NASA-cr-159481, 1979.
;;
SI 404;Linear Programming : Problem formulation, simplex and revised simplex methods. Duality and sensitivity. Case studies. Interior point methods. 
Nonlinear Programming : Problem formulation. Basic concepts from calculus of several variables, linear algebra and convex analysis. 

Iterative methods for unconstrained optimization. Least square optimization. Convex programming and Karush-Kuhn-Tucker theory. Penalty methods. Optimization with equality constraints. 

;;V. Chva"tal, Linear Programming, W.H. Freeman, 1983. 
A. L. Peressini, F. E. Sullivan and J. J. Uhl, Jr., Springer Verlag, 1988. 
S. Bradley, A. Hax and T. Magnanti, Applied Mathematical Programming, Addison-Wesley, 1978. 
A. Arbel, Exploring Interior Point Linear Programming, Algorithms and Software, M.I.T. Press, 1993. ;;
SI 405;     System of ordinary differential equations : Reduction of nth order o.d.e. to a system of 1st order o.d.e."s. Companion matrix. Picard"s theorem for existence and uniqueness and its implementation. 

State space formulation. Concept of system. Input-output and state space. Transition matrix and its properties. Fundamental and nonfundamental solutions. 

Phase Plane Analysis : Critical points and stability of a linear system. Liapunov stability method. Nonlinear system. 

Transform Analysis : Laplace transform (continuous time), z-transform (discrete time). Input-output analysis. 

Controllability, observability and stabilizability : Controllability matrix and Gramian. Observability as a dual notion of controllability. 

Stabilizability of a discrete system. 

;;A. V. Balakrishnan, Elements of State Space Theory of Systems, Optimization Software Inc., 1983. 
W. L. Luyben, Process Modeling, Simulation and Control for Chemical Engineers, McGraw-Hill International, 1990. 
A. F. Simmons, Differential Equations with Applications and Historical Notes, 
2nd Edition,Tata McGraw-Hill, 1991. 
H. J. White and S. Tauber, Systems Analysis, W.B. Sounders, 1969. 
L. A. Zadeh and E. Polak, System Theory, McGraw-Hill, 1969. 
;;
SI 406;Stochastic processes : description and definition. Markov chains with finite and countably infinite state spaces. Classification of states, irreducibility, ergodicity. Basic limit theorems. Statistical Inference. Applications to queueing models. 
Markov processes with discrete and continuous state spaces. Poisson process, pure birth process, birth and death process. Brownian motion. 

Applications to queueing models and reliability theory. 

Basic theory and applications of renewal processes, stationary processes. Branching processes. Markov Renewal and semi-Markov processes, regenerative processes. 

;;U. N. Bhat, Elements of Applied Stochastic Processes, Wiley, 1972. 
P. G. Hoel, S. C. Port and C. J. Stone, Introduction to Stochastic Processes, Houghton Mifflin, 1972. 
A. O. Allen, Probability, Statistics and Queueing Theory with Computer Science Applications, 2nd ed., Academic Press, 1990. 
J. Medhi, Stochastic Models in Queueing Theory, Academic Press, 1991. ;;
AE 658; Preliminary cycle optimization. Design requirements and specifications. Matching of powerplant components. 

Propellers: elements of propeller, representative blades element theory, vortex theory, momentum theory, propeller characteristics, performance graphs, propeller design criteria, Prop-fans. Intakes; subsonic intakes, supersonic intakes, various intake configurations, intake design criteria, intake flow analysis. Exhaust Nozzles: various nozzle configuration, Con-Dinozzles, critical subcritical and supercritical operations, variable geometry, nozzle, vectored thrust nozzle. Future propulsion systems for passenger aircraft and military aircraft. 

Powerplant component testing, engine testing and performance evaluation. 

;Nil;D.O. Dommasch, S.S. Sherby and T.L. Connolly `Airplane Aerodynamics, Pitman, 1967.  

J. Seddon, E.L. Goldsmith, `Intake Aerodynamics, Collins, 1985. 

J. Chauvin, `Supersonic Turbojet Propulsion Systematic & Components, AGARDO Graph -120, 1969. 
 
;;
SI 407;Probability, conditional probability. Bayes theorem, independence of events. Random variables. Distribution functions. Random vectors, conditional distributions. Expected values and moments. Standard univariate distributions. Weak laws of large numbers. Central Limit Theorems. Multivariate distributions such as multivariate normal and t distributions. 
Empirical distributions, distributions of order statistics, range, extremes. 

Point estimation : Sufficiency, method of moments and maximum likelihood. UMVU estimation. 

Simple and Composite hypotheses, two sample tests. 

Neyman-Pearson lemma, UMP tests, Non-parametric tests : Sign tests, Run tests, Rank tests, Chi-square goodness of fit. 
;;M. Woodroof, Probability with Applications, McGraw-Hill, 1975. 
G. G. Roussas, A First Course in Mathematical Statistics, Addison-Wesley, 1975. 
H. J. Larson, Introduction to Probability Theory and Statistical Inference, 3rd ed., Wiley, 1992. 
A. O. Allen, Probability, Statistics and Queueing Theory with Computer Science Applications, 2nd ed., Academic Press, 1990. 
;;
SI 501;  Mathematical preliminaries :  Asymptotic notation.  Advanced Data structures : Hash tables, Binomial Heaps, Disjoint sets.

Greedy Algorithms : Huffman coding, Minimum spanning Tree construction, Dijkstra"s shortest path construction.  Dynamic programming Algorithms : Matrix - chain multiplication, All pairs shortest path problems, Minimum weight triangulation of convex polygons.  Divide and conquer : Linear time selection, Educlidean closest pair problem, Strassen"s matrix multiplication algorithm.

Backtracking and Branch and Bound methods : Graph colouring, Integer programming, Approximation algorithms : Vertex cover, Euclidean travelling salesman problem, Set cover problem.;;T. Cormen, C. Leiserson, and R. Rivest, Introduction to Algorithms, MIT Press and McGraw Hill BOok Company, 1991.
U. Manber, Introduction to Algorithms : A Creative Approach, Addison-Wealey, 1989.;;
SI 502;Importance of SPPs in a wide range of problems in science and technology. Limitations of gradient based optimization techniques in SPPs arising in (i) real data based inventory optimization problems in industries, (ii) information processing and automatic knowledge acquisition under uncertainty. Applications of heuristic based probabilistic algorithms including genetic algorithms and neural network models for adaptive optimization. ;;S. M. Ross, Applied Probability Models with Optimization Applications, Holden-Day, 1970. 
J. K. Sengupta, Stochastic Optimization and Economic Models, Dordrecht Reidel, 1986. 
K. Schittkowski, More Test Examples of Nonlinear Programming Codes, Springer-Verlag, 1987. 
P. D. Wasserman, Neural Computing : Theory and Practice, van Nostrand Reinhold, 1989. 
J. H. Holland, Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems : An Introductory Analysis with Applications to Biology, Control and A.I., M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, 1972. 
Z. Michaleawicz, Genetic Algorithm + Data Structure = Evolution Program, Springer Verlag, 1992. 
;;
SI 503; Automatic mesh generation techniques : structured mesh (transfinite interpolation), unstructured grids (triangulation for polygonal and nonpolygonal domains). Finite difference schemes : Elliptic equations (ADI, SOR and Conjugate gradient methods), parabolic and hyperbolic equations with applications to real world problems. 
Finite element methods : Weighted residual formulation, basic steps. 

Solution process (sparse and bounded structures and post-processing). Applications to heat transfer, flow of viscous incompressible fluids. 

Nonlinear problems with computer implementations. 

;;J. F. Thompson, Z. U. A. Warsi and C. W. Mastin, Numerical Grid Generations : Foundations and Applications, North Holland, 1985. 
G. F. Carey and J. T. Oden, Finite Elements : Computational Aspects, Prentice Hall, 1986. 
J. N. Reddy, An Introduction to the Finite Element Method, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, 1993. 
J. E. Akin, Applications and Implementation of Finite Element Methods, Academic Press, 1982. 
A. R. Mitchell and D. F. Griffiths, The Finite Difference Methods in Partial Differential Equations, Wiley, 1980. 
G. D. Smith, Numerical Solutions to Partial Differential Equations, Oxford University Press, 1985. 
H. A. Carnahan and J. O. Wilks, Applied Numerical Methods, Wiley, 1969. 
;;
AE 661;Weak formulation, finite element method for one and two dimensional problems, one and two dimensional elements, Axi-symmetric ring element, Interpolation functions, Numerical integration, Boundary conditions, Solution of equations, Steady and unsteady problems. 
Application of finite element method for problems in the areas of fluid dynamics, heat transfer, structural mechanics. 

;;Kenneth H. Huebner, The Finite Element Method for Engineers, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1975. 
J.N. Reddy, An Introduction to the Finite Element Method, Second Edition, McGraw Hill Inc., 1993. 
;;
SI 504;Theory of linear estimation. The general linear model. Estimability of linear parametric functions. Gauss-Markoff Theorem. 
Principles of Design of Experiments. General structure of analysis of designs. ANOVA, ANACOVA. Regression analysis (one independent variable). Standard designs such as CRD, RBD, LSD, BIBD. Analysis using the missing plot technique. Factorial designs. Confounding. Analysis using Yates"algorithm. 

Special designs such as split-plot, strip-plot, cross-over designs. 

Orthogonal arrays, Response surface methodology. Taguchi method. 
;;N. L. Johnson and F. C. Leone, Statistics and Experimental Design, Vol. 2, 2nd ed., Wiley, 1977. 
D. C. Montgomery, Design and Analysis of Experiments, 3rd ed., Wiely, 1991. 
H. Spaeth, Mathematical Algorithms for Linear Regression, Academic Press, 1991. 
M. S. Phadke, Quality Engineering using robust design, Prentice Hall, 1989. 
P. J. Ross, Taguchi Techniques for quality Engineering, McGraw-Hill, 1988. 
G. E. P. Box, W. G. Hunter and J. S. Hunter, Statistics for Experimentors, Wiley, 1978. ;;
SI 505;  Two-way contingency tables : Table structure for two dimensions. Ways of comparing proportions. Measures of associations. Sampling distributions. Goodness-of-fit tests, testing of independence. Exact and large sample inference. 
Models for binary response variables : Generalized linear model of Nelder and Wedderburn. Logistic regression. Logistic models for categorical data. Probit and extreme value models. Log-linear models for two and three dimensions. Fitting of logistic and log-linear models. 

Log-linear and logistic model for ordinary variables. 

Regression : Simple, multiple, non-linear regression, likelihood ratio test, confidence intervals and hypotheses tests, tests for distributional assumptions. Collinearity, outliers, analysis of residuals. Model building. Principal component and ridge regression. 


;;E. B. Andersen, The Statistical Analysis of Categorical Data, Springer-Verlag, 1990. 
A. Agresti, Analysis of Categorical Data, Wiley, 1990. 
T. J. Santner and D. Duffy, The Statistical Analysis of Discrete Data, Springer-Verlag, 1989. 
A. Sen and M. Srivastava, Regression Analysis - Theory, Methods and Applications, Springer-Verlag, 1990. 
R. F. Gunst and R. L. Mason, Regression Analysis and its Applications - A Data Oriented Approach, Marcel Dekker, 1980. 
;;
AE 202; Basic concepts :Scope and Method of Thermodynamics; System-Boundary, Surroundings; State, Stable Equilibrium, State Co-ordinates and parameters, Extensive and Intensive Parameters; Energy interactions,Work and Heat transfers, Equilibrium, Quasistatic and Reversible process, Non-equilibrium and Irreversible Processes; Zeroth Law and Temperature, First Law and Internal Energy; Second Law - Entropy and Absolute Temperature; Third Law and Absolute Entropy;Thermodynamics of simple compressible systems, State postulate, Fundamental Representations, Thermodynamic Potentials; Jacobeam and Legender Transformations - Maxwell"s Equations, Derivation of thermodynamic properties. Applications: Closed and open systems, Polytropic processes, Cyclic process - Carnot"s cycle; Gas and vapour power cycles; Gas and vapour Refrigeration cycles; Operating Hardware of Engines; Mixtures of gases and vapours, Elements of Combustion; Elements of Heat Transfer, One-D compressible flow, isentropic flow, flow with friction and heat transfer, normal shock. Introduction to Aerospace power plants. ;Nil;
Nag, P.K. Engineering Thermodynamics, Tata McGraw Hill Co., 1989

Emmanuel G., Advanced Classical Thermodynamics, AIAA Ed. Series, 1987. ;;
SI 511; Polynomial curves : Bezier representation, Bernstein polynomials, Blossoming, de Castlijau algorithm. Derivatives in terms of Bezier polygon. Degree elevation. Subdivision. Nonparametric Bezier curves. 
Composite Bezier curves. 

Spline curves : Definition and Basic properties of spline functions, B-spline curves, de Boor algorithm. Derivatives. Insertion of new knots. Cubic spline interpolation. Interpretation of parametric continuity in terms of Bezier polygon. 

Geometric continuity. Frenet frame continuity. Cubic Beta splines and significance of the associated parameters. 

Tensor product surfaces. Bezier patches. Triangular patch surfaces. 
;;G. Frain, Curves and Surfaces for Computer Aided Geometric Design : A Practical Guide, Academic Press, 1988. 
L. Ramshaw, Blossoming : A Connect-the-Dots Approach to Splines, DEC systems Research Center, Report no. 19, 1987. 
;;
SI 512;Networks and Matroids : Maximum flow, minimum cost flow, bipartite and nonbipartite matchings. 
Matroids : Greedy algorithm, matroid intersection and union. 

Integer Programming : Model formulations, properties of integral polyhedra and computational complexity, relaxation and valid inequalities, duality, cutting plane algorithms, branch and bound. 

Heuristics. 

;;R. K. Ahuja, T. L. Magnanti, and J. B. Orlin, Network Flows : Theory, Applications and Algorithms, Prentice Hall, 1993. 
G. L. Nemhauser and L. A. Wolsey, Integer and Combinatorial Optimization, Wiley, 1988. 
A. Schrijver, Theory of Linear and Integer Programming, Wiley, 1986. ;;
AE 312; Based on AE 206 & AE 301;AE 206 and AE 301;;;
MG 645;Introduction, Analysis for Requirements, Establishing Requirements, Proposed Logical Model, Function Oriented Design, User Interface, Process Specifications, Proposed Physical Model, Data Flow Diagram, Logical DFD, Introduction to Reviews, Dialogue Design, Entity-Relationship Diagram, Third Normal Form Analysis, Entity Life Histories, Structure Charts.;MG;I.T.Hawryszkiewycz, Introduction to Structured Systems Analysis and Design (2nd Edition), Prentice Hall of India Private Limited (1994)
Pankaj Jalote Narosa, An integrated approach to Software Engineering (2nd Edition) Publishing House (1997)
V.K.Garg, S.Srinivasan, Workbook on systems analysis and design, Prentice Hall of India (2000)
;;
AE 672;Dynamics of discrete structural systems. Stiffness and flexibility matrices of simple structural systems. Basic structural relationships of aircraft structural components such as wings, fuselages etc. 

Principles of dynamics. Lagrangian equations of motion. Natural modes of vibration of structures. Damping in structures. Methods of solution of the governing equations of motion. Energy theorems and methods. Approximate methods of analysis and overview. 

Discretisation principles, derivation of matrices, equation of equilibrium. Natural vibration characteristics of structural systems. Forced vibration, normal mode method, proportional damping, elements of random vibration. 

;AE 4321;R.W. Clough and Joseph Penzien, Dynamics of Structures, McGraw Hill, 1975. 
R.H. Scanlan and R. Rosenbaum, Aircraft Vibration and Flutter, Dover, 1964. 
R.L. Bisplinghoff, H. Ashley and R.L. Halfman, Aeroelasticity, Addison-Wesley, 1965. 
C.M. Harris and C.E. Crede, Shock and Vibration Handbook, McGraw Hill, 1976. 
;;
SI 514;Density estimation : Kernel estimator, bandwidth selection, nearest-neighbour estimator, maximum penalized likelihood method, spline smoothing, applications. 
EM algorithm : Principle of data augmentation, definition and illustration of the algorithm, convergence. 

Gibbs sampling : Illustration in the bivariate case, generalization to three or more variables, convergence, applications. 

Resampling techniques : Bootstrap method, bootstrap confidence intervals and estimates of bias, bandwidth selection by bootstrap, jacknife and its relation to the bootstrap, the delta method. 

;;B. W. Silverman, Density Estimation for Statistics and Data Analysis, Chapman and Hall, 1986. 
M. A. Tanner, Tools for Statistical Inference, Springer-Verlag, 1991. 
B. Efron and R. J. Tibshirani, An Introduction to the Bootstrap, Chapman and Hall, 1993. ;;
SI 515; Matrix algebra and random vectors. Sample geometry and random sampling. The multivariate normal distribution. Inferences about a mean vector. Large sample inference about population mean vectors, proportions. Comparison of several multivariate population means. 
Two-way multivariate analysis of variance, classical linear regression model, least square estimation and inferences about the regression model. Model checking and other aspects of regression. Multivariate multiple regression. Principal component techniques. Factor analysis. 

Separation and classification for two populations. Fisher"s method for discrimination among several populations. Hierarchical and nonhierarchical clustering methods. 

;;R. Gnanadesikan, Methods for Statistical Data Analysis of Multivariate Observations, Wiley, 1977. 
D. F. Morrison, Multivariate Statistical Methods, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, 1976. 
N. H. Timm, Multivariate Analysis with Applications in Education and Psychology, Brooks/Cole, 1975. ;;
SI 516;Basic reliability models. Estimation and inferential aspects of these models. Probabilistic modeling of repairable systems. Statistical analysis of repairable systems and of failure data. ;;H. Ascher and H. Feingold, Repairable system Reliability, Marcel Dekker, 1984. 
L. J. Bain and M. Engelhardt, Statistical Analysis of Reliability and Life Testing Models : Theory and Methods, Marcel Dekker, 1991. 
S. K. Sinha and B. K. Kale, Life Testing and Reliability Estimation, Wiley Eastern, 1979. 
;;
SI 517; Decision functions and Risk functions for industrial decision making problems. Utility and subjective probability based optimal decision rules. Applications of Markov decision process. Multiple decision making and applications to real world problems. Applications of Bayes" decision rules. Introduction to statistical decision theory based inference in Artifical Intelligence. Development of algorithms. ;;J. D. Berger, Statistical Decision Theory : Foundations and Methods, Springer-Verlag, 1980. 
D. J. White, Decision Methodology : A Formalisation OR process, Wiley, 1975. 
G. Gregory, Decision Analysis, Pitman, 1988. 
;;
SI 518;Total quality control in an industry. Quality planning, quality conformance, quality adherence. Quality assurance and quality management functions. 
Control charts and allied techniques. Concept of quality and meaning of control. Concept of inevitability of variation-chance and assignable causes. Pattern of variation. Principles of rational sub-grouping. 

Different types of control charts. Concept of process capability and its comparison with design specifications, CUSUM charts. 

Acceptance sampling. Sampling inspection versus 100 percent inspection. Basic concepts of attributes and variables inspection. OC curve, Single, double, multiple and sequential sampling plans, Management and organisation of quality control. 
;;J. M. Juran and F. M. Grayna, Quality Planning and Analysis, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1970. 
A. J. Duncan, Quality Control and Industrial Statistics, 5th ed., Richard D. Irwin, 1986. 
A. V. Feigenbaum, Total Quality Control Engineering and Management, McGraw-Hill, 1961. 
E. L. Grant and R. Levenworth, Statistical Quality Control, 6th ed., McGraw-Hill, 1988. 
;;
SI 519; Introduction to inductive probability and machine learning. Statistical pattern recognition and clustering techniques. Stochastic approximation and rough classification. Bayesian classification. Sequential probability and incremental machine learning. 
Nonparametric methods for leader independent sample based learning. 

Random generate and test algorithms. Stochastic heuristics in guided learning by discovery. 
;;R. F. Albrecht, Artificial Neural Nets and Genetic Algorithms, Springer-Verlag, 1993. 
S. C. Choi and E. Y. Rodin, Statistical Methods of Discrimination and Classification : Advances in Theory and Applications, Pergamon press, 1986. 
S. J. Hanson et. al., (Eds.) Machine Learning - from Theory to Applications, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 661, Springer-Verlag, 1993. 
R. S. Michaelski et. al., (Eds.) Machine Learning - An Artificial Intelligence Approach, Springer, 1984. 
J. Press, Bayesian Statistics : Principles, Models and applications, Wiley, 1989. 
W. D. Wayne, Applied Nonparametric Statistics, 2nd ed., PWS-KENT, 1990. 
;;
MA 825;Modules over PID with applications to the structure of finitely generated abelian groups and canonical forms of matrices. Basic theory of commulative rings: Localization, integral dependence, Noetherian and Artinian rings, Hilbert"s Nullstellensatz, Hilbert series of graded algebras with applications to simplicial complexes, lattice points of convex polytopes and counting magic squares. ;;N. Jacobson, Basic Algebra, Vol. 1 and 2, Hindustan Publishing Corporation, 1984. 
S. Lang, Algebra, 3rd ed., Addison-Wesley, 1993. 
T. Hibi, Algebraic Combinatorics on Convex Polytopes, Carslaw Publications, 1993. 
Zariski and Samuel, Commutative Algebra, Van Nostrand, Princeton, Vol. I 1958, Vol. II 1960. (New Printing by Springer-Verlag) 
;;
MA 826;Review of differentiable manifolds, tangent spaces and derivative of a map. Morse functions, local surfaces, passing critical points and attaching cells. CW complexes and CW homology. Cobordism. Isotopies, extending isotopies, gluing manifolds, isotopies of discs. Surfaces, model surfaces, characterizations of disc, classification of compact surfaces. ;;M.W. Hirsch, Differential Topology, Springer-Verlag, 1976. 
J. Milnor, Morse Theory, Annals of Math. Studies, # 51, Princeton Univ. Press, 1963. 
M. Morse, The Calculus of Variations in the Large, AMS Colloquium Publication, Vol.18, 1934. 
;;
MA 827; Review of measure theory, Vitali covering theorem and its applications (Fundamental Theorem of Calculus for Lebesgue Integral).
Complex measures, total variation, absolute continuity, Radon-Nikodym theorem with applications, positive Borel measures, Riesz
representation theorem. Change of variables formula for Lebesgue integrals in Euclidean spaces.;;E. Hewitt and K. Stromberg, Real and 
Abstract Analysis, Springer-Verlag, 1969.
S. Lang, Real and Functional Analysis, 3rd Ed., Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1993.
I.K. Rana, An Introduction to Measure and Integration, Narosa Publishing House,1997.
W. Rudin, Real and Complex Analysis, Tata McGraw-Hill, 3rd ed., 1985.;;
MA 828;Topological vector spaces, separation properties, linear maps, boundedness and continuity, seminorms and local convexity, Baire category, Banach-Steinhaus theorm, open mapping and closed graph theorems, Hahn Banach theorems. Weak topologies. Distributions. 
Calculus with distributions, convolutions, Fourier transforms, tempered distributions, Payley-Wiener theorems, Sobolev"s lemma. 

;;W. Rudin, Functional Analysis, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1974. 
F. Treves, Topological Vector Spaces, Distributions and Kernels, Academic Press, 1967. 
K. Yosida, Functional Analysis, Springer-Verlag, 1968. 
;;
AE 673;  Polymer matrix composites in aerospace structures. Fibers and polymeric matrix materials. Fabrication processes. Introduction to anisotropic elasticity. Unidirectional composites. Micromechanics Interfaces and interphases in polymer composites. Laminates and lamination theory. Damage characteristics of laminated composites. Delamination in composites. Interlaminar stresses and free edge effects. Hygrothermal stresses in composites, short fiber composites. Experimental characterization of composites. Introduction to metal matrix, ceramic matrix and carbon-carbon composites. Laminated plates under lateral load. Transverse shear effects.  
;Nil;R.F. Gibson, Principles of Composite Material Mechanics, McGraw Hill, 1994
I.M. Daniel and O. Ishai, Engineering Mechanics of Composite Materials, Oxford University Press, 1994
G. Lubin, Handbook of Composites, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1982. 
;;
ME 608;;;;;
MA 829;   Review of ordinary differential equations. Sturm-Liouville problems. 
Green"s functions. Phase plane analysis and stability. Review of first and second order partial differential equations, classification of equations. Asymptotic series and perturbation methods. 

Survey of the integral transforms such as Fourier transforms, Laplace transforms, Hankel transforms. Application of integral transforms to the reduction of various boundary value problems. Fredholm and Voltera integral equations. Iterative solutions. Singular integral equations. 

;;R.K. Bose and M.C. Joshi, Methods of
Mathematical Physics, Tata-McGraw
Hill, 1984.
W.E. Boyce and R.C.Diprima, Elementary 
Differential Equations and Boundary 
Value Problems, Wiley, 1977.
S.G.Mikhlin, Integral Equations, Pergamon Press, 1957.
I.N. Sneddon, Elements of Partial Differential Equations,McGraw-Hill, 1957.
I.N. Sneddon, The use of Integral Transforms,Tata McGraw-Hill, 1974.
A. Zauderer, Partial Differential Equations of Applied Mathematics, Wiley, 1989.;;
MA 830;Review of some requisities. Iterative methods for the solution of linear and non-linear algebraic systems of equations including Gauss-Seidel, SOR and conjugate gradient Newton methods. Derivations of the conditions of their convergence and stability with illustrations. 
Discussion of finite difference methods (including ADI and LOD) and their convergence for the solution of elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic partial differential equations. 

Development of finite element methods with applications to various types of initial and boundary value problems. 

;;E. Issacson and H. B. Keller, Analysis of Numerical Methods, Wiley, 1966. 
A.A. Samarskii and E.S. Nikolaev, Numeical Methods for Grid Equations, Birkhauser-Verlag, 1989. 
M.K. Jain, Numerical Solution of Differential Equations, Wiley Eastern, 1984. 
K.J. Bathe, Finite Element Procedures in Engineering Analysis, Prentice-Hall of India, 1990. 
J.C. Strikwerda, Finite Difference Schemes and Partial Differential Equations, Wordsworth and Brooke/Coles Advanced Books and Software,1989. 
G.F. Carey and J.T. Oden, Finite Elements : Computational Aspects, Vol. III, Prentice-Hall, 1984. 
;;
MA 831;Basic equations of fluid flow. Constitutive equations and classification of fluids. Incompressible (Ideal, Newtonian, Non-Newtonian, Viscoelastic) fluid flows. Basic thermodynamics, compressible fluid flows. Supersonic, transonic and subsonic flows. 
Nonlinear wave propagation including shock waves of arbitrary strength
;;Landau and Lipschitz, Fluid mechanics, Pergamon Press, 1959. 
H. Schlichting, Boundary Layer Theory, McGraw-Hill, 1979. 
A.H.P. Selland, Non-Newtonian Fluid and Heat Transfer, Wiley, 1967. 
M.M. Denn, Process Fluid Mechanics, Prentice-Hall, 1980. 
D.J. Acheson, Elementary Fluid Dynamics. Clarendon Press, 1990. 
R.V. Mises, Mathematical Theory of Compressible Fluid Flows, Academic Press, 1958. 
A.R. Paterson, A First Course in Fluid Dynamics, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1983. 
;;
MA 832;Derivation of the basic equations of elasticity. Use of curvilinear coordinates. Solution for isotropic bodies in terms of potential functions. Problems depending on one harmonic function. Theories of plane strain and plane stress. Solutions of some plane problems using complex variable techniques. Axisymmetric problems in the theory of elasticity. ;;A.E. Green and W. Zerna, Theoretical Elasticity, Clarendon Press, 1963. 
I.S. Sokolnikoff, Mathematical Theory of Elasticity, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1977. ;;
AE 678; Introduction to static and dynamic aeroelastic phenomena. Divergence of a lifting surface, two-dimensional and three-dimensional analysis. Analysis of divergence, aeroelastic loads of tapered and swept wings. Loss of reversal of control two and three dmensional analysis. Assumed modes and matrix formulations. Aeroelastic efficiency and flexible aerodynamic derivatives. Fundamentals of flutter analysis. Quasi-steady and unsteady aerodynamic forces on airfoils. Two dimensional and three-dimensional flutter analysis - modal formulation, generalised unsteady airloads. Flutter of tapered and swept cantilever wings. Flutter computation methods. Buffeting and stall flutter. Galloping and Vortex induced vibrations of structures. Aeroelastic testing techniques. ;Nil; Y.C.Fung, An Introduction to the Theory of Aeroelasticity, Dover, 1969
B.L.Bisplinghoff, H.Ashley and R.L. Halfman, Aeroelasticity, Addison-Wesley, 1972.
C.H. Scanlan and R. Rosenbaum, Aircraft Vibration Flutter, Dover, 1968
E.H.Dowell, A modern course in Aeroelasticity, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1994.;;
MA 833; Review of conditional expectations. Martingales in discrete and continuous time. Square integrable Martingales. Weak convergence in metric spaces with special reference to C([0,1]) space. Dependent variables. Diffusion processes and mixing. Martingale Central Limit Theorem. ;;P. Billingsley, Convergence of Probability Measures, Wiley, 1999. 
R.J. Elliot, Stochastic Calculus and Applications, Springer-Verlag, 1982. 
K.R. Parthasarathy, Probability Measures on Metric Spaces, Academic Press, 1967. 
A.W. Van-der-Vaart and J.A. Wellner, Weak Convergence and Empirical Processes: With Applications to Statistics, Springer-Verlag, 1996.
D. Williams, Probability with Martingales,Cambridge Mathematical Textbooks,1991.;;
MA 834;UMP tests. Neymann-Pearson fundamental lemma. Distributions with ML ratio. Confidence bounds. Generalization of the fundamental lemma. 
Least favourable distributions. Applications to normal distribution. 

Similarity and completeness. UMP unbiased two-sided tests. Applications to exponential families. Fisher-Beherns problem. Unbaised confidence sets. Most powerful permutation and invariant tests. Admissibility of tests. Chi-square and likelihood ratio tests. Minimax tests and invariance. The Hunt-Stein theorem and its applications. 

;;T.S. Ferguson, Mathematical Statistics : A Decision Theoretic Approach, Academic Press, 1967. 
E.L. Lehmann, Testing Statistical Hypotheses, Wiley, 1986. 
C.R. Rao, Linear Statistical Inference and its Applications, Wiley Eastern, 1974.;;
MA 835;Elements of decision theory such as complete class theorem, admissibility of Bayes rule, minimax theorem. 
Review of sufficiency, consistency, and efficiency. UMVU estimators and their properties. Application to normal and exponential one and two sample problems. Information inequality (multiparameter case). Equivariance. Invariance. Application to location and scale families. 

MRE estimation. 

Bayes and minimax estimation for exponential families. Admissibility of estimators. Blyth"s ratio method. Karlin"s sufficient conditions. 

Pitman"s estimator and its properties. Simultaneous estimation. 

Stein"s phenomenon. Shrinkage estimation. 
;;J. Berger, Statistical Decision Theory, Springer-Verlag, 1980. 
T.S. Ferguson, Mathematical Statistics : A Decision Theoretic Approach, Academic Press, 1967. 
E.L. Lehmann, Theory of Point Estimation, Wiley, 1983. 
S. Zacks, The Theory of Statistical Inference, Wiley, 1971. 
;;
MA 836;Best asymptotically normal estimation. First and second order efficiency of estimators. Large deviations and measures of efficency. 
Locally asymptotically normal models. Locally asymptotically best decision rules. Contiguity of measures and applications. 

;;L. Le Cam, Asymptotic Methods in Statistical Deceision Theory, Springer-Verlag, 1986. 
L. Le Cam, Asymptotics in Statistics, Springer-Verlag, 1990. 
E.L. Lehmann, Theory of Point Estimation, Wiley, 1983. 
G.C. Roussas, Contiguity of Probability Measures, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1972. 
R.J. Serfling, Approximation Theorems of Mathematical Statistics, Wiley, 1980. 
;;
MA 837;This course will consist of lectures by faculty members on specialised areas in Mathematics. There will be three weekly meetings of one hour each. More than one special topic can be covered in parallel under the same course. The course will be coordinated by a single faculty member.;;;;
MA 838;This course will consist of lectures by faculty members on specialised areas in Mathematics. There will be three weekly meetings of one hour each. More than one special topic can be covered in parallel under the same course. The course will be coordinated by a single faculty member.;;;;
AE 676; Assumptions of Love-Kirchoff thin plate theory, governing equation and boundary conditions of thin plates. Rectangular plates with various boundary conditions; Navier"s amd Levy"s solutions; bending of circular and annular plates. Plates under combined action of lateral and in-plane loads. Classical laminated plate theory for anisotropic laminated plates. Deformation of shells without bending. General theory of cylindrical shells; shells having the form of a surface of revolution and axi-symmetrically loaded; spherical shells, conical shells. Approximate methods of analysis for plates and shells. 
; Nil;
S. Timoshenko and S. Woinowsky, Krieger Theory of Plates and Shells by Second Edition, McGraw Hill, 1975. 

;;
AE 677;;;;;
BT 402;Structure of Eucaryortic chromosomes, heterochromatin, euchromatin, molecular components,packing and organization nucleosome phasing, DNase I hypersensitive regions. Organization of bacterial genome. DNA structure and replication, proteins and enzymes in DNA replication, Okazaki fragments, replication of double strand circle and single strand circle DNA, RNA transcription, operon, amino acid synthetic operons, transcription control in lambda phage,regulation of eucaryotic transcription, structure of proka ryotic genes.Expression and processing of heterogeneous nuclear RNA, ribosomal RNA, tRNA.Universal Genetic code, degeneracy of codons, termination codons, wobble hypothesis, isoaccepting tRNA, genetic code in mitochondria, protein synthesis. Mutations, no nsense, missense, point mutation, intragenic and intergenic suppression, frameshift mutations, overlapping genes. 
DNA repair, photoreactivation, excision repair, mismatch correction, SOS repair Recombination, Rec A gene, Holliday structure, chi sequences, Site specific recombination. Transduction, transformation, conjugation, gene mapping, Insertion sequences, Transposons, natural plasmids. 

;;Benjamin Lewin, GENES, John Wiley and Sons, 1987. 
J.D.Watson N.H.Hopkins, J.W.Roberts, J.A.Seitz and A.M.Weiner, Molecular Biology of the Gene, Fourth edition, Benjamin Cummings Publishing company Inc. 1987. 
;;
AE 690;Selection of design specifications and basic design objective. Review of classical methods, design of compensators by frequency response method. Formulation of tracking and regulator problems, effect of disturbances, noise and plant parameter uncertainty or tracking and accuracy. State space approach, improvement using state feedback, pole placement method. Linear quadratic regulator theory. Design of observers. Introduction to some standard simulation and design packages. Design case studies in control systems. ;Exposure to AE 695 o; Kwakernask, H. and Sivan,R. Linear Optimal Control Systems, Wiley Interscience, 1972.
Friedland B., Control System Design, McGraw Hill Book Co., 1987
Fredrik, D.K. Computer Programmes for Simulation and Design of Control Systems, Academic Press, 1984. ;;
BT 404;Electromagnetic radiation, general features of Spectroscopy; Beer Lamberts Law, Difference spectroscopy; linear dichroism of oriented samples; biomolecular Fluorescence spectroscopy; quantum yield, factors governing fluorescence intensity; static and dyna mic quenching of fluorescence; energy transfer, polarization, anisotropy, time resolved fluorescence, application to biomolecules. CD and ORD spectroscopies, physical origins, applications to determine secondary structure of proteins. Infrared spectroscop y; IR of oriented samples; Raman and Resonance spectroscopy, Pulse and FT NMR, chemical shifts, coupling constants, ring currents, paramagnetic shifts, the problem of assignment in biopolymer, spin-spin, spin-lattice relaxation times; Nuclear Overhauser e ffect, chemical exchange application to biomolecular structure and dynamics. Electron paramagnetic resonance, hyperfine splitting, zero field splitting, tensor nature of EPR parameters, spin labels, applications to biomolecules. X-ray crystallography, fib re diffraction, neutron scattering. ;;C.R.Cantor and P.R.Schimmel; Biophysical Chemistry, Part 2, W.H.Freeman and company; 1980. 
J.R. Lakowicz; Principles of fluorescence spectroscopy; Plenum Press; 1983. 
I.D. Campbell and R.A.Dwek, Biological Spectroscopy; Benjamin, 1984. 
Phillip S.C. Mattews; Quantum chemistry of atoms and molecules; Cambridge University Press, 1986. 
P.W.Atkins; Physical Chemistry; 3rd edition, ELBS/Oxford Univ. Press, 1987. 
;;
BT 406;Historical perspectives, mitosis, Meiosis, Mendelian Genetics : law of segregation, Genotype, phenotype, dominance, recessiveness,Incomplete and codominance, test cross, Dihybrid and multihybrid cross, law of independent assortment. Gene interactions, epi stasis pleiotropy, variation in gene expression, penetrance, expressivity, Effect of environment, Allelism and Complementation, multiple alleles, Sex and inheritance, sex-linked genes, sex anomalies crossing over, linkage analysis, genetic mapping, extra chromosomal inheritance, aspects of population and evolutionary genetics. ;;E.J.Gardner, M.J. Simmons and D.P.Snustad, Principles of Genetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc. 1991. 
D.T.Suzuki, A.J.F. Griffiths, J.H.Miller and R.C. Lewontin, An Introduction to Genetic Analysis, W.H. Freeman and Company, New York 1989. 
;;
BT 408;Introduction to the microbial kingdom - An overview. Methods in microscopy, sterilization techniques and kinetics of sterilization, pure culture techniques of isolation and preservation, enrichment methods. Staining procedures. Morphological details of pr okaryotic and eucaryotic microbes. eg. bacteria, fungi, yeasts, protists, streptomycetes and their life cycles. Microbial nutrition and physiology - Phototrophs, heterotrophs and other nutritional groups. 
Microbial classification - methods with emphasis o n representative groups like bacteria, fungi, actinomycetes etc. Serotyping, rDNA and RFLP analysis. Viruses- structure, classification, modes of replication and growth,lytic cycle & lysogeny. Microbial growth-Kinetics of growth quantitative aspects.Methods of growth measurement. Monod"s equation, specific growth rate.Continuous cultivation techniques. Applied Microbiology : Representative application of microbes in industry,bioconversions, Agriculture and medicine. 
;;Stanier, R.T., Ingraham, J.L., Wheelis, M.L. and Painter, P.R., General Microbiology; Macmillan, 5th. Edition (1987). 
M.J.Pelczer, Jr., E.C.S.Chan and N.R. Krieg, Microbiology, Fifth Edition(1986) 
;;
BT 410;Introduction to Computer Organization; computer communications; file transfer protocols; Biomolecular databases; DNA sequence analysis software; protein structure prediction; homology comparison. ;;Nucleic Acid and Protein Sequence Analysis : A Practical Approach; Ed. M.J.Bishop & C.J.Rawlings, IRL Press, 1987. 
Handbook of Computer Communications Standards Vol. 3, W.Stallings, P.Mockapetris, S.Mcleod, T.Michel, Macmillan Publishing Co. NY, 1988. ;;
BT 411;Biosphere : concept and properties of a living cell. Chemical basis of life. Cell structure - plant, animal and microbial cells - molecular organisation. Composition of living matter - biomolecules. Properties of water, pH and buffers. Biomolecular hierar chy, macromolecules and molecular assemblies. Structure, functional groups, reactions and characterization of major classes of biomolecules. Amino acids and peptides. Techniques of protein purification and characterization. 
Precipitations, chromatographie s, electrophoresis, ultracentrifugation, etc. Covalent structure of proteins, its elucidation. Primary, secondary and tertiary and higher order structures with representative examples. Structure - function relationships - ribonuclease, lysozyme, chymotryp sin, myoglobin, cytochrome C, and hemoglobin. Evolution of protein structure and function. Chemical synthesis of peptides. Sugars : polysaccharides, cell walls and glycoproteins. Lipids : classification, lipid aggregates, lipoproteins and biological membr anes. Transport across biomembranes. Organelle fractionation techniques. Nucleosides, nucleotides and nucleic acids functional aspects. Chemical structure and base composition. Nucleic acid fractionation. The central dogma and DNA structure. 

;;A.L.Lehninger, Principles of Biochemistry CBS Publishers, 1987. 
D.Voet and J.G.Voet, Biochemistry, Wiley New York, 1990. 
;;
AE 692;Linearized transfer functions for longitudinal and lateral modes of dynamic motion. Longitudinal and lateral autopilots. Adaptive autopi-lots. Human pilot dynamics, pilot rating. Effect of Inertial cross coupling. Elements of missile control systems. Gyroscopic principle and instruments. Accelerometer, Hydraulic servosystems. 

;AE 4324 or equivvale;J.H. Blakelok, Automatic Control of Flight Techniques, john Wiley, 1966. 
A.L. Greensite, Analysis and Design of Space Vehicle Control Systems, Spartan, 1970. 
NORAIR Publications, Human Pilot, Buaer, 1972. 
NORAIR Publications, Artificial Feel Systems, Buaer, 1972. 
;;
BT 413;Tutorials and Problem set : Problem solving pertaining to subject from standard textbooks. ;;Theory And Problems in Biochemistry(1988) eds. P.W.Kuchel and G.B. Ralston 
I.H.Segel, Biochemical Calculations, 2nd Edition,(1976) 
;;
BT 453;Buffers & pKa, Cell fractionation, Centrifugation, Protein, Nucleic Acids, Lipid, Carbohydrate determination, percent analysis, enzyme assays for analysis-Sugar, Urea, LDH, Immobilization of enzymes and use,Enzyme purification-ammonium sulphate precipitat ion, Ion exchange, Gel filtration, affinity,table of purification, definition of units-Km and Vm determination, Criteria of purity-electrophoretic methods. ;;T.G. Cooper, Tools of Biochemistry, Wiley Interscience, 1977. 
D.Holme and H.Peck, Analytical Biochemistry, Longman, 1983. 
Robert Scopes, Protein Purification Principles and Practices, Springer Verlag, 1982. 
;;
BT 454;Identification of microflora, microscopy, staining procedures, Gram +ve, -ve, differential staining procedure, Biochemical tests, Sterilization techniques, media preparation, isolation of pure culture from samples growth studies,bioassays-{symbol 109 f " Symbol"|}; {symbol 109 f "Symbol"|}max, microbial extracellular enzyme, antibiotic-fermentation, isolation and bioassay, use of fermentor to study mass transfer(O2),Immunological techniques. ;;Methods in Microbiology Series, Academic Press. 
Methods in Enzymology Series, Academic Press. 
Manual of methods for General Bacteriology,ASM(1981),Eds.,Gerhardt and others. 
;;
BT 501;Concepts of rate processes in biological systems. Factors contributing to enzyme catalytic rates. Single and multi-substrate systems. 
Regulatory enzymes. Steady-state kinetics. Initial velocity, product inhibition, enzyme activation analysis. Effect of pH and temperature on enzyme rates. Isotope effects and their application to transition state structure. Classification and nomenclature of enzymes. Hydrolases and transferases; peptidases, esterases, kinases, ATPases. Oxidoreductases, lyases and some examp les of isomerisation, rearrangement and condensation reactions. The role of metal ions and cofactors like pyridoxal phosphate, Thiamine Pyrophosphate, folate, biotin, flavin, nicotinamide nucleotides and lipoate in enzyme catalytic mechanisms. Structural enzymology. Active site characterisation. Methods of active site group assignment; chemical modifications and site directed mutagenesis. Integration of kinetic, chemical, and structural data towards enzyme mechanisms. Immobilization techniques and methods . Influence of immobilisation on enzyme activity. Frontiers in enzyme technology. 

;;A.R.Fersht, Enzyme structure and Mechanism, W.H.Freeman, 1977. 
The Enzymes, vol. 1. and 2.P.D.Boyer, Ed. Academic Press, 1970. 
I.H.Segel, Enzyme Kinetics, Wiley, 1975. 
K.M.Plowman, Enzyme kinetics, McGraw-Hill 1972. 
C.S.Walsh, Enzymatic Reaction Mechanisms, W.H.Freeman, 1979. 
M.D.Trevan, Immobilised Enzymes.Wiley, 1980. 
;;
BT 502;Natural and Acquired Immunity, Complement system, elements of the Immune system, Tcells, B cells, Antigen Presenting cells, Subsets of T cells, helper and suppressor cells, cell mediated and humoral immunity, ADCC and Natural Killer cells. Antibodies stru cture, function and diversity, T cell receptor and accessory molecule activation, major histocompatible antigen, diversity, antigen presentation, Mixed lymphocyte reaction, isotope, allotype, idiotype, idiotype network hypothesis, immune regulation, toler ance Polyclonal and monoclonal antibody. Immunological techniques : Immunodiffusion, immunoelectrophoresis, ELISA, RIA, fluorescence activated cell sorter. ;;Essential Immunology, I.M. Roitt (1988) Blackwell Scientific Publication, 
W.E.Paul, Fundamental Immunology,: Raven Press, New York, 1987. 
L.Hood, I.L.Weissman, W.B. Wood and J.H. Wilson, Immunology, Benjamin Cimmings Press, 1984. 
E.S.Golub, Immunology:A synthesis. Sinauer Associates, 1987. 
;;
BT 503;Concept of recombinant DNA technology and purpose, basic methodology, use of plasmids, Type I, II and III restriction modification systems, type II restriction endonucleases, nomenclature and sequence recognition, mcr and mrr genotypes, linkers, adaptors, blunt end ligation, homopolymeric tailing, methods in screening recombinant DNA. Labelling of DNA :Nick translation, random priming, use of Klenow enzyme, T4 DNA polymerase, bacterial alkaline phosphatase, polynucleotide kinase, hybridization techniques, northern, Southern and colony hybridization. Restriction maps and mapping techniques. cDNA cloning in plasmids. maximizing gene expression Construction of prokaryote expression vectors, deletion mapping, linker scanning. Cloning in M13 mp vectors, applic ation to DNA sequencing site-directed mutagenesis, S-nuclease mapping. Dideoxy sequencing, chemical sequencing of DNA, RNA sequencing. Lambda vectors, insertion and replacement vectors, selection and screening recombinant phage, in vitro packaging, genomi c libraries and cDNA cloning. Cosmid vectors. Yeast transformation, yeast cloning vectors. Cloning and expression in mammalian cells, methods of selection and screening. 
Specialised topics : Transgenic animals, polymerase chain reaction DNA footprinting. DNA fingerprinting, RFLP Applications of recombinant DNA technology in medicine, agriculture, veterinary sciences. 

;;W. Old and Primrose, Principles of gene manipulation, S.B. University Press, Cambridge 1985. 
T. Maniatis, E.F. Fritsch, J.Sambrook, Molecular Cloning : A Laboratory Manual, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press 1982. 
D.M. Glover, DNA cloning, Volume 1-A practical approach, IRL Press Ltd. 1985. 
;;
AE 695;Fundamentals of Matrix Algebra and Vector spaces, solution of simultaneous equations for square, under-determined and over-determined systems. Concepts of basis vector transformations, similarity and adjoint transformations, eigen values and eigen vectors, Jordan form, characteristic equation, analytic functions of square matrices and Cayley-Hamilton theorem.  Concepts of state, state-space,state-vector, methods for obtaining the system mathematical model in the state-space form, state-space form for aerospace systems e.g.aircraft dynamics, missile dynamics, inertial navigation system etc. Solution of homogeneous state equations, concept of fundamental matrix and state transition matrix.  Methods for evaluating state transition matrix, solution of non-homogeneous equations. Phase variable and Jordan Canonical forms. Controllability and observability of the systems, pole placement design with full state feedback. Introduction to optimal control.;Nil;Friedland, B. "Control System Design", An Introduction to State-space Methods, McGraw-Hill,New York, 1987. 
J.J.D"azzo & C.H. Houpis, Linear Control System Analysis & Design: Conventional and Modern, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1995.
Etkin, B. "Dynamics of Atmospheric Flight" John Wiley & Sons, 1972. 
;;
BT 601;Strategies in sequential synthesis. Concept of orthogonal chemistry. 
Solution versus solid phase chemistry. Manual versus automated Synthesis. Combinatorial synthesis and its objectives. Synthesis of natural and artificial nucleosides. Base and hydro xyl protected nucleosides. Chemistry of phosphate esters and phosphoric anhydrides. 

Phosphate, phosphonate and phosphite ester approaches to the formation of interneucleotide bonds. Solid phase assembly. Deprotection, cleavage, purification and analysi s. Duplex DNA and gene synthesis. 

Modified polynucleotides, and perspectives in their application. Alpha amino and carboxy protections. Side chain protections. Alternate strategies in peptide bond formation. Residue specific considerations. Detecti on and prevention of racemization. Solution versus solid phase assembly. Contrasts between polystyrene, polyamide and polyoxyethylene supports. Contrasts between t-BOC and F-MOC assembly. Cleavage, unmasking, analysis and purification. 

;;M. Bodanszky, Principles in Peptide Synthesis, 1984. 
J. Jones, The Chemical Synthesis of Peptides, Oxford Science Publications, 1991. 
E. Artherton & R.C.Sheppard, Solid Phase Peptide Synthesis. A Practical Approach. IRL Press, 1989. 
F. Eckenstein, Oligonucleotides and Analogs. A Practical Approach. IRL Press, 1991. ;;
BT 602;Over view of Cell-Cell and intracellular signalling mechanisms, endocrine, paracrine,autocrine and synaptic transmissions. Cell-Cell recognition, Cell-adhesion molecules. Concepts of receptors (extracellular, intracellular), receptor-ligand interaction(co ncepts of agonist and antagonist), receptor characterizations, receptor functions. Extracellular receptors : Coupling of receptors to different signal transducing machinery; G-poteins, Ion channels, and catalytic proteins. G-proteins : structure, function , adenylate cyclase system, cAMP-PK and CREB proteins. Calcium channels, Oscillations of calcium conc. as signals. Receptors with protein tyrosine kinase activity, structure and function. Intracellular receptors : steroid receptors, structure and function . Second messengers; Phosphoinositides, Inositol 1,4,5, tris phosphate, Diacyl glycerol, cAMP,cGMP, Arachidonic acid, Prostaglandins, NO. Mechanism(s) of signal transduction : Coupling of activation of receptors to intracellular signal transducing machine ry, protein kinase(s) cascade, gene regulation. Regulation of receptor function; receptor modifications, adaptation of cells. Signal transduction pathways in development and disease. relationship of receptor tyrosine kinases with proto-oncogenes. Developm ental abnormalities due to defective signalling pathways. Signal transducing machinery as targets for potential drugs. ;;Norman, A.W. and Litwack, G. , Hormones, Academic Press, 1987. 
Gilman, G.G, Goodman, L.S., Rall, T.W. and Murad F.C. (Eds.) The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics (7th. edition ), Macmillan, 1985. 
Posli, G. and Crooke, S.T. (Eds.), Mechanisms of Receptor Regulation, Plenum Press (1985). 
;;
BT 603;Overview of human physiology. Central and peripheral nervous systems. 
Endocrine system. Respiratory system. Cardiovascular system. 

Digestive system. Hepatobiliary and renal systems. Receptor mediated signal transduction. Nerve impulse and conducti on. Membrane and soluble receptors. Receptor purification, characterization and reconstitution. Receptor Binding assays. Receptor theories. Agonist and antagonist characterization. Neurotransmitters and Hormones. 

Biosynthetic and metabolic pathways . Neurotransmitters in CNS. Adrenergic and cholinergic neurotransmitters. Opiate system; Endorphins and Enkephalins. 



;;C.Hansch,Comprehensive Medicinal Chemistry,Ed. Vol I-VI Academic Press, 1990. 
M.Sandler and H.J.Smith,Design of Enzyme Inhibitors as Drugs, Oxford Univ. Process,1989. 
T.J.Perun and C.L.Propst Dekker,Computer Aided Drug Design.1989. 
;;
BT 604;Organized Drug discovery and development. Pharmacological, Microbial, Recombinant, Biochemical and Molecular level screening systems and their construction strategies. Alternative strategies in Lead identification. Lead optimization. Preclinical devel opment. 
Clinical trials, Patenting, and clearance for application. Receptor versus enzyme mediated drug action. SAR and its quantitative description. QSAR. Molecular principles in agonist and antagonist action. Thermodynamic and structural principle s. Objectives and approaches in the native ligand modification. Molecular graphic and dynamical methods in peptide and protein mimicry. Morphinans versus Enkephalins: paradigm example of a peptido-mimetic. Other illustrative examples from current lite rature. Drug design by receptor site fit. 

Active site simulations using PDB structure data and homology modeling. Graphical and computational active site fits exploiting small structure data libraries, and commercial softwares. Concept of Perturbation Free Energy and its practical applications. Rational design of enzyme inhibitors. Enzyme catalytic principles: A recapitulation. Affinity Labels. Illustrative examples. Principle of Suicide Inactivation; design strategies, scope and limitations. Il lustrative examples to cover hydrolases, PLP based enzymes, isomerases and redox enzymes. 

;;C.Hansch,Comprehensive Medicinal Chemistry,Ed. Vol I-VI Academic Press, 1990. 
M.Sandler and H.J.Smith,Design of Enzyme Inhibitors as Drugs, Oxford Univ. Process,1989. 
T.J.Perun and C.L.Propst Dekker,Computer Aided Drug Design.1989. 
;;
BT 605;Introduction to computer organization; computer communications; asynchronous communications; LAN; WAN; file transfer protocols; Workstations; Nucleic acid sequence databases; protein sequence databases; other databases relevant to molecular biology; submi ssion and retrieval of sequence to/from databases; DNA sequence analysis software; sequence composition, editing, manipulation; comparison and conversion; restriction enzyme site analysis and mapping; computer aided analysis of one-dimensional restriction fragment gels; scanning and analysis of DNA sequencing gels; scanning and analysis of DNA sequencing gel autoradiographs; computerized identification of coding sequences; procaryotic and eucaryotic coding regions; secondary structure prediction of RNA; a lgorithms and programs; Protein structure prediction; protein folding; empirical methods for secondary and tertiary structure prediction; algorithms for molecular sequence comparison and alignment; interference of evolutionary relationships; methods. ;;Nucleic Acid and Protein Sequence analysis :A Practical Approach ,Ed.M.J.Bishop and C.J. Rawlings, IRL Press, 1987. 
Handbook of Computer Communications Standards Vol. 3, W.Stallings, P.Mockapetris, S.Mcleod, T.Michel, Macmillan Publishing Co. NY, 1988. 
;;
BT 606;NMR phenomenon;parameters;chemical shifts;spin-spin coupling;Bloch equation;the rotating frame of References; pulses; free induction decay; Fourier transform; signal to noise ratio;signal averaging;sampling;computer considerations,spin echoes;measuring T1 and T2;;application to biosystems;nuclear Overhauser efffect; steady state NOE;transient NOE; internuclear distances; applications to protein structure determination; multiple-pulse NMR; polarisation transfer; second dimension; J-spectroscopy; COSY; NOES Y; ROESY; chemical exchange; application to proteins; nucleic acid,sugars etc.;13C NMR; gated decoupling; assignments; DEPT; heternuclear coorelation; NMR of other nuclei eg 31P and 31N. ;;Edwin D. Becker, High Resolution NMR., Academic Press, 1968. 
J.K.M.Sanders, B.K.Hunters, Modern NMR Spectroscopy, Oxford Univ. Press 1987 
A.E.Derome, Modern NMR Techniques for Chemistry Research, Pergamon Press 1987. 
K.Wiithrich, NMR of Proteins and Nucleic Acids, Wiley-Interscience 1986. 
;;
BT 607;In this Course, three to four contemprory themes in Biotechnology(listed below) are covered. These themes will be offered jointly by Biotech Centre and external faculty. 
1. Plant cell culture and tissue culture. 

2. Enzymes and Biocatalyses-Immobilized enzyme applications. 

3. Bioconversion/Fermentation of Industrial fine chemicals. 

4. Antibiotics and Chemotherapy. 

5. Recombinant DNA technology and Protein therapeutics. 

6. Waste treatment, Utilization and methanogenesis. 

;;Selected reviews and articles from Nature, Science, Annual reviews etc. 
Biotechnology, A Comprehensive Treatise in eight volumes, Edts. 
H.J.Rehm and G.Reed, Vol. 4,Edts.H.Pape and H.J.Rehm.VCH,1986. 
Comprehensive Biotechnology, 3 Volumes, Eds. Moo-Young, M., Elsevier, London 1986 
;;
BT 608;In this Course, three to four contemprory themes in Biotechnology(listed below) are covered. These themes will be offered jointly by Biotech Centre and external faculty. 
1. Biosensors and immmunodiagnostics. 

2. Modeling and graphics in rational molecular design. 

3. Philosophy of new drug discovery. 

4. Hybridoma technology, monoclonals and mamilian cell culture. 

5. Industrial microbiology and representative fermentations. 

6. Microorganisms in pollution control. 
;;Selected reviews and articles from Nature, Science, Annual reviews etc. 
Biotechnology, A Comprehensive Treatise in eight volumes, Edts. 
H.J.Rehm and G.Reed, Vol. 4,Edts.H.Pape and H.J.Rehm.VCH,1986. 
Comprehensive Biotechnology, 3 Volumes, Eds. Moo-Young, M., Elsevier, London 1986 
;;
BT 609;Applications in mammalian genetic engineering, Biopharmaceuticals, Transgenics in animals and plants, restriction fragment length polymorphism, DNA fingerprinting, human genetic diseases. Gene targeting, human gene therapy PCR technology : Gene amplificat ion, inverse PCR, multiplex PCR, RT-PCR, application in genetic diagnosis pulsed field gel electrophoresis. Oligonucleotide synthesis, Automated DNA sequencing, Human Genome project. Man made antibodies, phage display. Application in other spheres of huma n activity emphasized by selected articles. Yeast artificial chromosome. ;;PCR Protocols and Applications (1990) Edited by M.A. Innis, D.H. Gelfand, J.J. Sninsky, T.J. White. 
Genome Analysis - A Practical Approach (1988) Edited by K.E. Davies. 
Selected articles from Nature, Science, Cell etc. 
;;
BT 610;Biotechnology scenario; past & present impact due to molecular biology inventions. Nexus between scientific excellence and technological self reliance. Specific opportunities in the Indian context. National gene pool and concerns about biosafety. Environm ental issues. Ethical and Legal considerations. Commercialization of Biotechnology. Social & economical considerations. Concept of Intellectual Property. Nexus between inventor rights and promotion of inventions infringement. 
Patents & their composition, Patentable subject matter, Cost of a patent, Product versus process patents, patentability of life forms. 

Evolving Intellectual Property Systems; National and International. 

;;Role of Patents and Patent Information in Biotechnological Inventions - document of the International Bureau of World Intellectual Property Organisation (1994). 
;;
BT 611;Hybridoma technology, B cell hybridomas, T cell hybridomas, human monoclonal antibodies, humanizing antibodies, chimeric monoclonal antibodies, applications. T cell activation, signal transduction, Thymic education, positive and negative selection, cytoki nes and their receptors in T and B cell activation, relation to disease. Detailed biology of tolerance, clonal deletion of T and B cells, clonal energy of T and B cells. Hypersensitive reaction, immediate and delayed molecular mechanisms and signalling pa thways. Autoimmunity, human diseases, animal models, role of TH cell, MHC and T cell receptor, mechanisms, vaccines; subunit vaccines, synthetic vaccines. 
transplantation and tumour immunology. 

;;Immunology (1992) ed. J. Kuby, W.H.Freeman and Company. 
Selected articles from Nature, Science, immunology reviews and immunology today. 
;;
AE 697;Kinematics of motion, Dynamics of motion, newton s  D Alembert s principle, Hamilton s canonical equations. 

Dynamics of curvilinear motion, Equation of the Orbit under inverse square law, Kepler s laws of orbital motion, Orbital elements, the two-body problem, Computation of Orbits from different initial conditions, Kepler s equation, the three-body problem, Lagrange s points, orbital perturbations due to drag etc. Satellite Orbit. 

equatorial, sun synchronous. 

Spacecraft equations for rigid satellites, solution for simple cases, Stabilization: passive methods and active methods, sensors for spacecraft. 

Control-structure interaction problem, Model reduction, necessity and ways, design strategies, control and observer spill-over. 
;Nil;Kaplan M.H. "Modern Spacecraft Dynamics and Control, John Wiley and Sons, New york, 1976 
McCuskey, S.N. Introduction to celestial mechanics, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., USA, 1963. 
;;
BT 612;The scope of industrial microbiology. Screening strategies for new metabolite such as antibodies, enzymes, amino acids and other substances. Strain improvement methods and their application. 
Fermentation media, stock cultures, and inoculum preparation. So urces of raw materials for Biotechnology industry. Fermentation procedures, purification and recovery of products. Biochemical basis of production processes. Production, structure, biosynthesis, regulation and uses of organic acids, amino acids, nucleosid es, nucleotides and related compounds, vitamins antibiotics and ergot alkaloids. Microbial transformations and their application. Immobilised enzymes and cells. 

Enzymes as products of fermentation. Representative examples - Penicillin acylase, glucose iso merase, invertase. Aspects of single cell proteins, microbial leaching, Extra cellular polysaccharides. A brief introduction to patents and secret processes. Fermentation economics and process appraisal. 

;;Crueger and A. Crueger, Biotechnology : A Textbook of Industrial Microbiology, English Edn by T.D.Brook, Sinaeur Associates, 1990. 
L.E.Casida Jr Industrial Microbiology, Wiley Eastern Ltd.,1989. 
G.Reed, Prescott and Dunn"s Industrial Microbiology, Fourth Edition . Edt, CBS Publishers, 1987. 
Biotechnology, A Comprehensive Treatise in eight volumes, Edts. H.J.Rehm and G. Reed., Vol.4, Edt.H.Papa and H.J.Rehm. VCH, 1986. 
Harry W.Seeley Jr. and Paul Van Denmark,Microbes in Actions : A lab Manual of Microbiology, D.B. Taraporwalla and Sons, 1984. 
;;
AE 701;Dynamics of Rigid and Flexible Rotors. Support Flexibility and Damping. Estimation of Critical Speeds, Mode Shapes and steady state Response for specified unbalance excitations. 
Low Speed Balancing : Static and Dynamic Balancing, Balancing Machines, Field (In-situ ) Balancing. 

Flexible Rotor Balancing, different methods and evaluation criteria. 

Experiments in Rigid and Flexible Rotor balancing, Pseudo high speed balancing

Future Developments in Balancing Technology. 

;;

Rao J.S. Rotor Dynamics (2nd Ed.) Wiley Eastern Limited, 1991 
Rieger N.F., Balancing of Rigid and Flexible Rotors, The Shock and Vibration Monograph Series, SVM-12, Naval Research Lab., Washington, DC 1986. 
;;
AE 702; Introduction to nonlinear dynamics, bifurcation theory and continuation methods. Problem of inertia coupling in rapid rolls and its solution.

Flight dynamics at high angles of attack, Normal and Large-amplitude wing rock. 

Wing rock of delta wings, Topological methods Nonlinear dynamics of missiles and projectiles, Roll lock-in, Catastrophic yaw. 

 

;Nil;Hancock, G.L., An Introduction to the Flight Dynamics of Rigid Airplanes, Ellis Horwood, 1995. 
Kuznetsov, Y.A., Elements of Applied Bifurcation Theory, Springer Verlag, 1995. 
Ananthkrishnan, N., Continuation and Bifurcation Methods Applied to Nonlinear Problems in Flight Dynamics, Ph.D. Thesis, IIT Bombay, 1994. 

;;
BT 614;X-Ray Crystallography; electromagnetic radiation; X-Rays; generation of X-Rays; `Scattering; atomic scattering factors; scattering lengths; structure factor and effects of thermal vibration in crystals; X-ray diffraction; interference fringes from atoms; X-Ray diffraction from a molecular crystal; Bragg"s law of diffraction; properties of crystal; symmetry properties; crystal lattice and reciprocal lattice; space groups; estimation of molecular weight; methods of collecting data; resolution of structure; limitations on resolution; determination of molecular structure; general considerations; structure of a small molecule; Patterson function; structure of a macromolecule; multiple amorphous replacements; isomorphous heavy atom derivatives; difference patt ern maps; least-squares refinement; electron density maps; X-ray fiber diffraction;scattering from fibers; scattering from a helix; structure factors of helices; X-ray scatering from nucleic acid fibers. ;;M.J.Buerger, Contemporary Crystallography, McGraw Hill, 1970. 
G.E.Bacon, Neutron Physics, Wykeham, London, 1969. 
L.Koeter and Steyerl, Neutron Physics, Springer Verlang, 1977. 
B.E.P.Beostan, R.W.Horne and Roy Markham, Electron Diffraction and Optical Diffraction Techniques, Elsevier, N.Y.1973. 
Pinsker, Electron Diffraction, Butterworths, 1953. 
G.E.Bacon, Neutron Diffraction, Clarendon Press, 1962. 
Cantor CR & Schimmel PR, Biophysical Chemistry Part II, W.H.Freeman/NY 1980. 
;;
BT 651;Synthesis of protected amino acids or nucleotides. Peptide & internucleotide bond formation in the solutionphase Preparation of polymers support and residue coupling. Solid phase oligopeptide assembly. Isolation of product & HPLC analysis. Enzyme Inhibito r assay to determine kinetic/thermodynamic parameters. Saturation analysis of protein ligand binding Radiotracer handing and coupling Competitive ligand binding to improve receptor preparation(one membrane, one soluble). ;;Methods in Enzymology Series, Academic Press. 
;;
BT 652;Oligo peptide/oligo nucleotide structure conformation analysis by NMR. Estimation of protein secondary structure content by CD. Solvent dependence of hyperfine parameters of spin labelled probes. Study of charge-transfer complexation by UV. Flourescence a nalysis of Protein-Ligand interaction. Intermolecular interaction;geometries & energies; a theoretical simulation. ;;Spectroscopy in Biochemistry, Ed. J.E. Bell, 1981, CRC Press. 
Nucleic Acid and Protein Sequence analysis : A Practical approach ; Ed. M.J. Bishop and C.J. Rawlings, IRL Press, 1987. 
;;
BT 653;Establishing chicken fibroblast culture, DNA transfection in mouse L cells, Hybridoma selection on HAT, Genomic library and screen for a specific gene, Basic yeast genetics -cloning by complementation, Gene disruption in yeast, Mutagenesis experiments. ;;Methods in Enzymology Series, Academic Press. 
;;
BT 654;Western blot, Protein Separation using FPLC, Fermentation using Aspergillus, Steady State Enzyme kinetics, Generation of polyclonal antibodies, Detection of Antibodies using ELISA, hemeagglutination. ;;Methods in Enzymology Series, Academic Press. 
;;
BT 701;Under the course Research Proposal the student is expected to work independently to generate a comprehensive research proposal of industrial or academic importance, based on extensive literature search and consultations with the research supervisor and p ossible other experts. The proposal is to be compiled as a dissertation whose evaluation would include a seminar and oral defence before a panel of examiners. The grading would take into cognizance originality, innovativeness and feasibilty of the proposa l. The objective is to harness innovative ideas from fresh minds. ;;;;
BT 801;Diversity of metabolic pathways. Anabolic and Catabolic routes for lipids, carbohydrates, aminoacids, enzymology- enzyme kinetics, activation/inhibition and steady state analysis. Allosteric, Isotope effects. Integration of metabolism and regulatory aspec ts. Flux through the pathways, Rate limiting steps, Regulatory enzymes. 
Molecular mechanisms of signal transduction, Receptor-Ligand interactions. Gate ion channels, G-proteins, Protein kinases. Metabolic compartmentation and transport phenomenoa. Selecte d reviews from Nature, Science and Annual Reviews in Microbiology. 

;;D.E. Metzler, Biochemistry, The Chemical Reaction of Living Cells, Academic, 1977. 
A.L Lehninger, Principles of Biochemistry, CBS Publishers and Distributors, 1987. 
D.M. Greenberg, Metabolic Pathways, Volumes I-4, Third ed., Academic Press, 1967-1969. 
H.J. Vogel, Metabolic pathways, Volume 5, Third ed., Academic Press, 1970. 
;;
BT 802;Cell organization and function, cell division and DNA replication, Generation of cellular energy, Structure and function of cell organelles, RNA transcription, Protein synthesis, Cell differentiation, Cell transformation, Prokaryotic gene regulation, Grow th factors, Eukaryotic gene regulation, Tumor viruses. ;;J.D. Watson, N.H. Hopkins, J.N. Roberts, J.A. Steitz and A.M. Weiner, Molecular Biology of the gene, Fourth eds., Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Co. 1987. 
G. Palade, B. Alberts and S. Spudich, Annual Reviews of Cell Biology, Volumes 1,2 and 3, Plato Alto, California, 1985,1986 and 1987. 
B. Clarkson and R. Baserga, Control of proliferation in animal cells, Cold Spring Harbour Laboratory, 1974. 
;;
BT 803;Spectroscopic methods, Adsorption spectroscopy, Difference and derivative Spectroscopy as applied to biomolecular interactions, Fluorescence spectroscopy, Membrane Proteins, Nucleic acid probes, Fluidity, Polarity and Viscosity measurements, Energy transf er and quenching studies, ESR, NMR, Laser, Raman and FT-IR spectroscopy, theoretical and practical aspects of Ligand - Macromolecular interactions, X-ray Diffraction, Protein folding, Computer applications in Biology. ;;D. Freifelder, Physical Biochemistry- Applications to biochemistry and molecular biology, W.H. Freeman and Co., 1986. 
C.R. Cantor and P.R. Schimmel, Biophysical Chemistry (Part 1,2,3) W.H. Freeman and Co, 1980. 
;;
BT 804;Amino acids, chemical nature of polypeptides, amino acid analysis. 
Protein sequences and evolution, Conformational predictions. Proteins in solutions, Interactions with other molecules. Nucleotides, Coenzymes, Physical characteristics, Conformational feat ures. Hydrogen bonding and base stacking. The double helix. DNA polymorphism. RNA structure. RNA protein interaction. Higher organization of DNA. Brief survey of replication, transcription and translation, Proteinbiosynthesis. Covalent modification and to pogenesis.Site directed mutagenesis. Prespectives of chemical synthesis. Functional group protection deprotection. Condensing reagents. Solution vs Solid phases systhesis. 

;;T.E. Creighton, Proteins, Structure and molecular properties, W.H. Freeman and Co.,1984. 
W. Sanger, Principles of nucleic acid structure, Springer 1984. 
M. Bodansky, Peptide Chemistry, Springer, 1988. 
;;
BT 806;The structure and composition of Biomembranes. The structure and properties of membrane lipids. Characterization and structural principles of membrane proteins, Lateral and Transverse symmetry in membranes, Membrane dynamics and protein lipid interactions . Molecular enzymology. Interactions of small molecules with membranes, Partitioning, permeability and Electrical effects, Pores, Channels and Transporters. The cell surface receptor. Membrane recycling and signal transduction. Membrane biogenesis. ;;R.B Gennis, Biomembranes- Molecular structure and function, Springer, 1988. 
A. Azzi, Membrane Proteins- Isolation and Characterization, Springer, 1986. 
M.K. Jain and R.C. Wagner, Introduction to Biological Membranes, John Wiley, 1980. 
;;
MM 201;Ore handling, Metallurgical Accounting and control. Particle size analysis. Commnition, Liberation, Crushers, Grinding Mills, Industrial Screening, Classification, Gravity concentration, Heavy media separation. Froth flotation, 
Magnetic and High tension separation, Dewatering, Tailings disposal, Process Integration and Flow-sheet analysis. 

;;1. B.A.Wills, Mineral Processing Technology (5th Edition), Pergamon Press , 1992. 
2. E.J.Kelly and D.J.Spottiswood, Introduction to Mineral Processing, John Wiley & Sons, 1982. 
3. A.M.Gaudin, Principles of Mineral Dressing, Tata-McGraw Hill, 1974. 
;;
MM 202;Laws of thermodynamics, concepts of reversibility, internal energy, enthalpy, entropy, maximum work, free energy, fugacity, activity and chemical potential, homogeneous and heterogeneous equilibria, phase rule, properties of solutions and concepts of partial molal properties, alternative standard states and interaction parameters, statistical concepts of entropy. Basic kinetic laws, order of reactions, rate constant, elementary and complex reactions, rate limiting steps and Arrhenius equations, theories of reaction rates - simple collison theory, activated complex theory. ;;
D.R.Gasekell : Introduction to Thermodynamics, Hemisphere Publishing Corpn. McGraw-Hill 2nd Edition, 1981. 
Y.K.Rao, Stoichiometry and Thermodynamics of Metallurgical Processes, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1985. 
K.J.Laidler, Theory of Chemical Reaction Rates, McGraw Hill, 1969. 
;;
MM 204;Space lattice, crystal structure of ionic, covalent and metallic materials. Crystallographic directions and planes. Points defects, dislocations and twin, grain-boundaries, Structure of silicates and polymers. 
Solid solution and intermetallic compounds. Binary phase diagrams of important ferrous and non-ferrous alloys and related microstructures. Elements of ternary diagrams. 

;;K.M.Ralls, T.H.Courtney and J.Wulff, Introduction to Materials Science and Engineering, Wiley Eastern, 1978. 
V.Raghavan, Physical Metallurgy Principles and Practice, Pretice-Hall (India), 1983. 
J.F.Schackelford, Introduction to Materials Science for Engineers, 2nd Ed., Macmillan, 1988. 
V. Raghavan, Materials Science and Engineering: A first course, 3rd ed. Printice-Hall of India, 1990. 
;;
MM 211;Importance of analysis in metallurgical contest. Selectivity Interference - Composite methods - Sampling - preparation of sample for analysis, classification of analytical methods. Principles of Gravimetric and volumetric methods applications. Analysis of steels, cast iron, Non ferrous alloys. Slags and flux materials. 
Electroanalytical methods : Electrogravimetry - coulometry polarography and amperometry. Optical methods : Absorption methods : Spectrophotometry. atomic absorption spectrometry : flame and non-flame methods. 

Emission Methods: flame photometry, spectrography. Separation methods: Applications. Solvent extraction, Ion exchange methods and Mercury cathode electrolysis. 

Laboratory practicals : Experiments dealing with above methods of analysis will be undertaken in detail. 

;;H.H.Willard, L.L.Merritt, J.A.Dean and F.A.Seltle, Instrumental methods of analysis, 6th Eds. C.B.S. Publishers, 1986. 
V.I.Posypaiko and N.A.Vasina, Analytical Chemistry in Metallurgy MIR Publications. Moscow 1984. 
G.W.Ewing, Instrumental methods of chemical analysis, 5th Eds. McGraw-Hill, 1985. 
Yu.Lyalikov, Physico-Chemical analysis, Mir Publishers, Moscow, 1968. 
;;
MM 212;Influence of chemical composition on mechanical and physical properties of materials. Importance of trace and micro analysis in monitoring industrial pollution. Analysis of ultra pure materials for specific electronic nuclear applications. 
Developments in electro analytical methods. Anodic stripping voltametry. 

X-ray methods : Emission, absorption and diffraction methods. X-ray fluorescence - applications. Inductively coupled plasma, atomic emission spectroscopy. Mass spectrometry. Surface analysis by photoelectron Spectrometry (ESCA) and Auger electron spectrometry. Activation analysis. 

Role of nonmetallics in metallic systems. Estimation of elements such as oxygen, nitrogen, hydrogen, carbon, sulphur boron in materials. Applications of above mentioned characterization methods to engineering materials viz. Ceramics, polymers, metals and alloy systems. 

Laboratory Practicals : Experiments based on some of the methods considered above will be arranged for selective engineering materials. 

;;P.E.J.Flewitt and R.K.Wild : Microstructural characterisation of metals and alloys, The Institute of Metals, London, 1985. 
A.Skoog : Principles of Instrumental analysis., 3rd Edn., Holt-Saunders. Japan 1985. 
James A.Plambeck, Electroanalytical chemistry, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1982. 
H.H.Willard, L.L.Merritt, J.A.Deans and F.A.Settle, Instrumental methods of analysis. 6th Eds. CBS. Publishers and Distributors, 1986. 
;;
MM 213; Experiments based on the following : comminution processes, liberation, particle characterization hydrocyclone, gravity methods, electrostatic and electromagnetic methods, flotation and floculation, dewatering and agglomeration of ore fines. ; MM 201 (Exposure); S.Venkatachalam and S.N.Degaleesan, Laboratory Experiments in Mineral Engineering (Oxford and IBH), 1982. 
;;
MM 214;Preparation of metallographic specimens : polishing, etching, electropolishing/etching. Macro-examination. 
Microstructural studies of metals and alloys such as steels, cast irons, brasses, bronzes, babbits, aluminium alloys etc. Microstructural studies of ceramics and polymers. 

Binary phase diagrams by thermal analysis. Study of microstructure under scanning electron microscope. Determination of phase transformation temperatures by thermal analysis and dilatometry. 

Use of DTA/DSC; photomicrography. Microhardness measurement of phases. Interference microscopy. 

;;G.F.Vander Voort, Metallography - Principles and Practice, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1984. 
;;
MM 216;Principles of processes like roasting, calcining, sintering, smelting, refining, continuous casting, reheating for hot processing, process annealing and heat treatment, processing of polymers and ceramics. 
Laws of mass action, thermophysics and thermochemistry of reactions, Mass and energy balances for above processes. 

;;Allison Butts, Metallurgical Problems, McGraw-Hill Revised Edition, 1986. 
;;
MM 301;Free energy - composition diagrams for binary systems. Diffusion in interstial and substitutional solid solutions. Atomic mobility and vacancy diffusion. High diffusivity paths. Kirkendall effect. Diffusion in ceramics, Applications of diffusion equations. 

Homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation in a single component system. Interface and diffusion controlled growth. Coherent, semicoherent and incoherent interfaces. Transformations controlled by heat flow. Solidification of a single phase alloy. Dendritic and cellular growth. Kinetics of eutectic and eutectoid transformations, precipitation and dispersion hardening. Cold work, recovery and recrystallization. Grain growth. Order-disorder changes. Elements of martensitic transformation. Hardening and tempering phenomena. 

;MM 202 (Exposure);D.A.Porter and K.L.Easterling : Phase Transformations in Metals and alloys, Van-Nostrand, 1981. 
A.K.Jena and M.C. Chaturvedi, Phase Transformations in Materials,Prentice Hall, New Jersey (1992). ;;
MM 302;Review of stress-strain description and constitutive relationships in elasticity and plasticity. Yield criteria, normality conditions and the associated flow rules. Ideal plastic work, friction work and redundant work. Classification of metal working processes. 
Metal forming equipment: Hammers, Mechanical and Hydraulic Presses. 

Open-die and close die forging operations. Classification of rolling mills. Exxtrusion and Wire drawing processes. Stretching, drawing and bending of sheet metal. 

Slab analysis of plane strain and axisymmetric upsetting, rolling, extrusion and wire drawing processes. 

Novel forming processes like explosive forming and superplastic forming. 

;;Mechanical Metallurgy, G.E. Dieter, McGraw-Hill SI Metric Edition, 1988. 
Metal forming: Mechanics and Metallurgy, W.F. Hosford and R.M. Caddell, Prentice-Hall, Inc. 1983. 
Metalworking Science and Engineering, E.M. Mielnik, McGraw-Hill, 1991. 
;;
MM 203;Ceramic classification based on structure and properties - electrical, magnetic and optical ceramics, mechanical behaviour, ceramics for high strength, high temperature and structural applications, glass ceramics, ceramic coatings and composites. 
Preparation and characterization of ceramic powders, shape forming, sintering and hot pressing techniques, Joining of ceramics to metals/ceramics. 

;;W.D.Kingery, Introduction to Ceramics, Wiley, New York, 2nd Edn. 1976. 
F.H.Norton and R.E.Huntington, Fine Ceramics : Technology and applications, Krieger Publications, 1978. 
D.W.Richerson, Modern Ceramic Engineering, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1982. 
;;
MM 304;Overview of iron and steel industry. Iron ore, its beneficiation and agglomeration. Coal and coke. Blast furnace, direct reduction and smelting-reduction processes. Basic oxygen, electric arc and other steelmaking processes. Ladle metallurgy and deoxidation. Ingot and continuous casting. Remelting-refining processes. Physical chemistry of metallic solutions, slags and iron and steelmaking reactions. Refractories for iron and steel industry. Energy, environmental and economic considerations. ;;W.T. Landford Jr. et al (Eds)., The Making, Shaping, Making of Steel, 10th Edition, United State Steel, AISI, 1985. 
C.R. Taylor (Ed), Electric Furnace Steelmaking, Iron and Steel Society of AIME, USA, 1985. 
C. Bodsworth and H.B. Bell, Physical Chemistry of Iron and Steel Manufacture, Elsevier, 1972. 
F. Oeters, The Metallurgy of Steelmaking, Verlag Stahleisen, Dusseldorf, 1994. 
A. Chatterjee, Beyond the Blast Furnace, CRC Press, Boca Raton, USA, 1993. 
;;
MM 305;Elastic and plastic deformation: Nature of stress-strain curves for metallic, polymeric and composite materials; effect of temperature, strain rate and other variables; creep, superplasticity, mechanical models and deformation maps. 

Dislocation and strengthening mechanisms: fundamentals and applications - properties and mobility of dislocations; solid solution strengthening; Hall-Petch relationship, substructure development. 

Fatigue and fracture: characteristic of fatigue fracture, cyclic stress-strain behaviour, fracture at low and high temperatures, fracture mechanics, fracture mechanism maps. 

;MM 204 (Exposure);T.H. Courtney, Mechanical Behaviour of Materials, McGraw-Hill (Intl.edition), 1990. 
G.E.Dieter, Mechanical Metallurgy, McGraw-Hill Book Co. (Third edition), 1988. 
R.W. Hetzberg, Deformation and fracture mechanics of engineering materials, John Wiley & Sons (Third edition), 1976. ;;
MM 306;Electrical conduction in metals, alloys and ionic solids. Materials for resistor and contact applications. Concept of superconductivity. 

Zone refining and preparation of single crystals. Intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors. Effect of temperature on mobility, carrier density and conductivity. Compound semiconductors. 

Classification of magnetic materials, domain structure, hysteresis loop and anisotropy. Soft and hard magnetic materials - alloys and ferrites. 

Dielectric constant and polarizability, frequency dependence of polarizability, dielectric strength. Materials for insulators and capacitors. Piezoelectric and ferroelectric materials. 

;PH 209;
C.M.Srivastava and C.Srinivasan, Science of Engineering Materials, Wiley Eastern (1987). 
;;
MM 307;Fluid Statics. Fluid Flow : Definitions, shell momentum balances, overall balances, concept of friction factor, dimensional analysis and friction factor correlations, flow over submerged bodies, packed and fluidised beds. Equations of continuity and motion, flow over a flat plate. 
Fourier s law, conductivity in solids, liquids and gases, one dimensional steady conduction, composite walls, extended surfaces, conduction with internal heat generation, two-dimensional problems: numerical solutions, unsteady state conduction, Heisler s charts and numerical methods. Convective transfer and heat transfer correlations. Radiation. 

Fick s law and diffusivity, Differential Equation of Mass Transfer, steady and unsteady state diffusion, convective mass transfer and mass transfer correlations. 

;;G.H.Geiger and D.R.Poirier : Transport Phenomena in Metallurgy, Addison-Wesley, 1973. 
J.R.Welty, C.E.Wicks and R.E.Wilson, Fundamentals of Momentum, Heat and Mass Transfer, 2nd Ed., John Wiley, 1976. 
;;
MM 308;Fuels : Classification, source and properties. Combustion principles and combustion devices. 

Refractories : Characteristics and applications. 

Furnaces : Thermal interactions in furnaces, fuel consumption, heat and mass balances, thermal efficiency and Sankey diagrams. Aerodynamics of furnaces, production of flow, furnace atmospheres, waste heat recovery devices, Principles of electric heating : resistance, arc and induction furnaces. 

;MM 308 (Exposure);Fuels : Classification, source and properties. Combustion principles and combustion devices. 

Refractories : Characteristics and applications. 

Furnaces : Thermal interactions in furnaces, fuel consumption, heat and mass balances, thermal efficiency and Sankey diagrams. Aerodynamics of furnaces, production of flow, furnace atmospheres, waste heat recovery devices, Principles of electric heating : resistance, arc and induction furnaces. 

;;
MM 309;Thermal methods of ore preparation-thermodynamic stability diagrams, smelting, converting and refining. Structure and properties of slags. Leaching under atmospheric and elevated pressures and microbial leaching. Purification of leach liquors- ion exchange and solvent extraction. Cementation and gaseous precipitation. Kinetics of hydrometallurgical process. Electrowinning and electrorefining of metals from aqueous and fused salt systems. ;;H.S.Ray, R.Sridhar and K.P.Abraham, Extraction of Non-ferrous metals. Affiliated East West Press, New Delhi, 1985. 
T.Rosenquist, Principles of Extractive Metallurgy, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1983. 
R.D.Pehlke, Unit Processes of Extractive Metallurgy, Elasevier, 1973. 
;;
MM 310;Particulate processing : characteristics, preparation and treatment of metal and ceramic powders. Powder compaction techniques, sintering and subsequent techniques. Interrelation between powder characteristics, compacting, sintering conditions and properties of the product. Applications. 
Joining processes : Metal/metal and metal/ceramic joining processes. Structural characteristics and properties of joints. Arc, plasma, electron-beam, laser welding processes. Brazing and soldering processes and application. 

Coating and surface modification processes : hard metal and ceramic coating, ion implantation, laser beam surface treatments. 

Vacuum process : Physical vapour deposition of metals and ceramics and thin film techniques. Chemical vapour deposition. 

Innovative processing techniques like casting in the solid/liquid phase region, mechanical alloying, Fibre and Filament production, Magnetic stirring during solidification. 

Machinability, characterization of machining and grinding tools. 

;;R.M. German, Powder Metallurgy Science, MPIF, Princeton, New Jersey, 1984. 
P.Ramakrishnan, (Ed.) Powder Metallurgy Opportunities for Engineering Industries, Oxford and IBH, 1987. 
James S. Reed, Introduction to the principles of ceramic processing, John Wiley and Sons, 1988. 
S.D.Kulkarni, Lecture Notes, IIT, Bombay, 1996. 
;;
MM 311;Determination of heat capacities, heats of mixing and vapour pressure of metals and alloys, activities of components in alloys, slags and aqueous solutions. Corrosion of metals : polarisation studies, determination of corrosion rates from Tafel plots, hydrogen over-voltage and high temperature oxidation studies, electrodeposition and electrowinning of metals from aqueous media. Lab. project assignments demonstrating the application of the above technique in actual practice. ;;Kubarschewski O, Alcock C.B., Spencer P.J: Materials Thermochemistry, Pergamon Press, 1993. 
G.Fontana, Corrosion Engineering, McGraw-Hill, 1986. 
Modern Electroplating by Lowenheim F.A, 3rd ed., John Wiley, 1974. 
;;
MM 312;Determination of critical temperatures, hardenability, effect of cooling rates quenching media. Studies of tempering phenomena, carburising, heat treatment of special steels. Group discussions on heat treatment processes like annealing, normalising, hardening and tempering, special heat treatment processes like austempering, martempering surface hardening, carburising, carbonitriding, nitriding, cyaniding etc. ;;Determination of critical temperatures, hardenability, effect of cooling rates quenching media. Studies of tempering phenomena, carburising, heat treatment of special steels. Group discussions on heat treatment processes like annealing, normalising, hardening and tempering, special heat treatment processes like austempering, martempering surface hardening, carburising, carbonitriding, nitriding, cyaniding etc. ;;
MM 313;Introduction to X-rays. Filters. Atomic Scattering factor and structure factor. Intensity calculations. Reciprocal Lattice, Ewald sphere and their use to represent diffraction condition. 
Identification of unknown samples, Lattice parameter calculations, Intensity Calculations. 

Introduction to DSC/DTA. Determination of transformation temperatures and enthalpies. SEM, Investigation of microstructure under different processing conditions. 

;;B.D.Cullity, Elements of X-ray diffraction, Addision-Wesley, 1976. 
Metals Handbook, 9th Edition, ASM, Vol.10, Materials Characterization, 1986. 
;;
MM 314;Design problems related to metallurgical processes : based on the applications of thermodynamics, kinetics and transport phenomena. ;;G.H. Geiger and D.R. Poirier: Transport Phenomena in Metallurgy, Addison-Wesley, 1973. 
;;
MM 315;Introduction to instruments and their performance criteria with emphasis on statistical analysis of measurements. 
Measurement of motion (displacement, velocity, acceleration), force, vibration, temperature, pressure, flow, viscosity, level and quantity. Measurement of surface finish. 

Application of digital computers in experimental data analysis. 

;;B.C.Nakra and K.K.Chaudhry, Instrumentation measurements and systems, Tata-McGraw-Hill, 1985. 
L.F.Adams, Engineering Measurements and Instrumentation The English University Press Ltd., 1975. 
;;
MM 316;Tensile, compressive and hardness testing: Principles, procedures and standards. Tensile behaviour of plain carbon steels and non-ferrous alloys and determination strength, ductility parameters and strain hardening coefficients. 
Study of discontinuous yielding and strain aging in low carbon steels. Correlations between grain size and strength, Hardness and Strength, Concept of toughness, methods of evaluation of toughness : impact testing and fracture toughness. Effects of low temperature and environment on strength and toughness. Correlation between toughness and carbon in steels. 

Formability evaluation : Cupping tests and grid method. Study of deformation maps. Material behaviour under cyclic loading (fatigue) and corrosion fatigue. 

;;Metals Handbook, Vol.8 (Mechanical Testing) 9th Ed., American Society for Metals, 1985. 
Fracture Toughness and Testing and its Applications., American Society for Testing of Materials, STP (381), 1970. 
;;
MM 321;Structure of liquid metals and properties of liquids metals influencing castability such as fluidity, absorption of gases. 
Nucleation : Thermodynamic aspects, homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation, rate of nucleation, dynamic nucleation. 

Solidification of single phase metals and alloys. The nature of solid-liquid interface. Solute redistribution effects, constitutional supercooling and its effect on structure. 

Solidification of multiphase alloys - eutectics, peritectics, particles and inclusions in melts. Some important alloy systems and control of their solidification structures. The structure of ingot. Formation of chill, columnar and equiaxed zones, control of grain structure. 

Typical defects encountered during solidification processing : Segregations, hot tears, porosity, inclusions. 

Applications : Casting processes such as sand casting, di-castings, centrifugal, continuous casting etc., single crystals, zone refining, composites and metallic glasses, rapid solidification. 

;;G.J.Davies, Applied Sciences Publishers, 1973. 
P.W.Webster, Fundamentals of Foundry Technology, Portcullis Press, 1980. 
W. Kurz and D.J. Fischer: Fundamentals of Solidification, Trans.Tech. Publishers, 1986. 
;;
CL 201;Chemical Industry-history and development. Chemical Engineering as a Profession-history and scope. Structure of a chemical process. Units and dimensions.

Properties of gases, liquids and solids. Concepts of equilibrium and rate processes. Representation of data in graphical form. Enthalpy concentration diagram, psychrometric charts. Steady state material and energy balances in non-reacting and reacting systems without and with by pass, purge and recirculation. Material and energy balances in unsteady state systems. Nuclear reactions and energy exchange or conversion systems. 

;NIL;E.V.Thompson and W.H.Ceckler, Introduction to Chemical Engineering, Int. Std. ed., McGraw Hill, New York, 1978., 
O.A.Hougen, W.M.Waston and R.A.Ragatz, Chemical Process Principles, Part-1, 2nd ed., Asia Pub.House, Bombay,1959., 
D.M.Himmelblau, Basic Principles and Calculations in Chemical Engineering, 5th ed., Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi, l989. 
B.I.Bhatt and S.M.Vora, Stoichiometry, 2nd ed., Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, l984. 
;;
CL 203;Overall mass, momentum and energy balances; Differential mass, energy and momentum balances; Application to selected situations. Molecular transport mechanism and transport properties. Development of velocity, temperature and concentration profiles. 

Unsteady state molecular transport analysis and its applications. Turbulent transport mechanism and analysis of heat, mass and momentum transfer. Interphase transfer. 

;NIL;C.O.Bennet and J.E.Myers, Momentum, Heat and Mass Transfer, 3rd ed.,McGraw Hill, l982. 
R.B.Bird, W.E.Stewart and E.N.Lightfoot, Transport Phenomena, John Wiley, l960. 
A.S.Foust, L.A.Wenzel, C.W.Clump, L.Maus and L.B.Andersen, Principles of Unit Operations, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 1980. 
;;
CL 204;Continuity equation for compressible and incompressible flow. Bernoulli`s equation. Friction head loss for pipe flow. Friction loss for expansions, contractions and fittings. Power requirements for flow. Pipe layout and economical pipe diameter. Steady and unsteady flows; velocity profile and boundary layer calculations of turbulent flows. Prandtl mixing length and eddy diffusion. Flow through fixed and fluidised beds. Flow measuring devices for incompressible and compressible fluids. Pumps and compressors. Mixing and agitation. Vacuum producing devices.

;CL 203;S.K.Gupta, Momentum Transfer Operations, Tata McGraw Hill, l979. 
W.L.McCabe and J.C.Smith and P. Hariott, Unit Operations of Chemical Engineering, 4th ed. McGraw Hill,1985. 
J.M.Coulson and J.F.Richardson, Chemical Engineering, Vol.l, Pergamon Press, l970. 
A.S.Foust, L.A.Wenzel, C.W.Clump, L.Maus and L.B.Andersen, Principles of Unit Operations, 2nd ed. Wiley, New York, 1980. 
;;
CL 206;Heat transfer by convection, Free and Forced convection. Laminar and turbulent flow heat transfer inside and outside tubes. Film and overall heat transfer coefficients. Heat exchangers. Heat transfer through submerged coils. Heat transfer in fixed and fluidised beds. Boiling and condensing, heat transfer. Boilers and condensers. Single and Multiple - Effect evaporators. Unsteady state heat transfer. Heat transfer by radiation. Black and gray body radiation. View factors. Luminous and non-luminous gases, Combined conduction, convection, and radiation. Insulation.

;CL 203;J.M.Coulson and J.F.Richardson, Chemical Engineering, Vol.l 3rd ed.,ELBS, Pergamon Press, 1977. 
B.Gebhart, Heat transfer, 2nd ed.,McGraw Hill, l979. 
J.P.Holman, Heat transfer, 6th ed., McGraw Hill, 1986. 
J.R.Welty, C.E.Wicks and R.E.Wilson, Fundamentals of Momentum, Heat & Mass Transfer, 3rd ed.John Wiley, 1984. 
;;
CL 212;Experiments in fluid Mechanics, Heat Transfer, Mass Transfer.;;;;
CL 214;Experiments in Materials Technology.;;;;
CL 220;Thermodynamic systems. Zeroth Law and temperature. Equations of State. First law of Thermodynamics. Adiabatically impossible processes and entropy. The Second Law of Thermodynamics. Application of First and Second laws to open and closed systems. Enthalpy and auxiliary functions. Gibbs and Helmholtz free energies. Chemical potential and criteria of equilibrium. Maxwell equations and thermodynamic properties of pure substances. Work from heat and power cycles. Refrigeration cycles and refrigerants Thermodynamic analysis of process.

;CL 201;K.G.Denblgh, Principles of Chemical Equilibrium, 4th ed., Cambridge University Press, 1981 
B.F.Dodge, Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics, McGraw Hill, l967. 
J.M.Smith and H.C.Van Ness, Introduction to Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics, 4th ed. McGraw Hill, l987. 
R.B.Balzhelser, M.R.Samuels and J.D.Ellassen; Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics, Prentice Hall, 1971. 
;;
CL 240;Factors determining the choice of materials of construction of Chemical industries. Engineering properties and methods of fabrication of materials like timber, plastics, rubbers, fibers and other polymer materials. Metals and alloys; their structure and properties. Corrosion, its classification, environmental study and methods of elimination and prevention. Crystalline and non-crystalline Ceramic systems. Glass and porcelain enamels, cements refractories, ceramics.

;NIL;D.Z. Jestrazebaski Nature and Properties of Engineering Materials, 3rd ed., Toppen Co. Ltd., 1987 
J.L. Lee and Evans, Selecting Engineering Materials for Chemical and Process Plants. Business Works, 1978. 
;;
CL 300;Capital formation in chemical industries, different methods of calculation of fixed costs. Capital Investment and Working Capital. Depreciation, amortization and obsolescence in Chemical Industries. Perpetuity and sinking fund, economic selection of equipment size, capitalized costs. Optimization of process parameters, a few examples. Break even point analysis and discounted cash flow.

;NIL;M.S. Peters and K.D. Timmerhaus, Plant Design and Economics for Chemical Engineers, 3rd ed. McGraw Hill, 1980. 
V.W. Uhl and A.W. Hawkins, Technical Economics for Chemical Engineers AIChE, 1971. 
;;
CL 301;Size reduction, screening and particle size distribution, Storage and handling of solids. Drag force and terminal settling velocity., Gravity Settling and Continuous Thickners. Jigging, Tabling and flotation. Filtration equations for compressible and incompressible cakes; specific cake resistance. Filter processes and continuous thickners. Centrifuges, cyclones, hydro-cyclone fibre and fabric filters, liquid scrubbers and electrostatic precipitations. Fluidization and applications; design of fluidized beds. Hydraulic and pneumatic transport of solids.

;CL 204;S. K. Gupta, Momentum Transfer Operation, Tata McGraw Hill, 1979, 
W.L. McCabe, J.C. Smith and P.Harriott,Unit Operation of Chemical Engineering, 4th ed. McGraw Hill, 1985. 
A.S.Foust, L.A.Wenzel, C.W.Clump, L.Maus and L.B.Andersen, Principles of Unit Operations, 2nd ed. Wiley, New York, 1980. 
;;
CL 303;Interphased mass transfer Theoretical number of equilibrium stages and number of transfer units. Stage efficiency; height of transfer units. Simultaneous heat and mass transfer. Humidification, Dehumidification, Cooling towers, Gas absorption, Calculations for binary and multicomponent mixtures.

;CL 203;R.E. Treybal, Mass Transfer Operations, 3rd ed. McGraw Hill, 1981, 
A.S. Foust et al, Principles of Unit Operations, 2nd ed. Wiley, New York, 1980. 
;;
CL 304;Distillation, Batch distillation, continuous fractionation. Calculations with multiple feeds and withdrawals. Azeotropic, extractive, steam and molecular distillation. Tray hydrodynamics and tray efficiency; Liquid-liquid extraction : Calculations with and without reflux for immiscible and partially miscible system. Leaching : Single and multistage operations based on solvent free co-ordinates.;CL 203;R.E. Treybal, Mass Transfer Operations, 3rd ed. McGraw Hill, 1981. 
B.D. Smith, Design of Equilibrium Stage Processes, McGraw Hill, 1958. 
J.M. Coulson and J.F. Richardson, Chemical Engineering, Vol. II, ELBS Pergamon Press, 1970. 
;;
CL 311;Experiments in Heat Transfer, Fluid Mechanics, Thermodynamics.;;;;
CL 312;Experiments in Fuels and Combustion, Instrumentation.;;P.D. Sunavala, Laboratory Tests on Fuels, Popular Prakashan Bombay, 1975. 
G.W. Himus, Fuel Testing, Leonard Hill, 1953. 
;;
CL 314;;;;;
CL 321;Partial molar quantities. Gibbs-Duhem Equation in multicomponent systems. Phase-Rule, Single component phase equilibria. Thermodynamics of solutions. Electrolytes, Ideal and Non-ideal solutions. Estimation and determination of activity coefficients. Regular solution theory. High pressure vapor-liquid equilibria. Fugacity and properties of mixture. Liquid-Liquid and Solid-liquid equilibria. Chemical reaction equilibria. Homogeneous and Heterogeneous reaction systems. Equilibrium constants and compositions in multiple reactions.

;CL 220;K.G. Denbigh, Principles of Chemical Equilibrium, 4th ed. Cambridge University Press, 1981. 
D.F. Dodge, Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics, McGraw Hill, 1967. 
R.D. Balzhelser, M.R. Samuels and J.D. Elassen, Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics, Prentice Hall, 1971. 
O.A. Hougen, W.M. Watson and R.A. Ragatz, Chemical Process Principles, Vol. II, Wiley, 1962. 
R.C.Reid, T.K.Sherwood and J.M.Prausnitz, Properties of Liquids and Gases, 4th ed., McGraw Hill, & B.E. Poling, 1987. 
;;
CL 322;Review of Chemical reaction equilibria. Classification of Chemical reactions. Homogeneous systems. Rates of reactions. Order of reaction and rate constant. Collection and interpretation of kinetic data. 

Rates of complex Reactions : Parallel, series and other cases. Heterogeneous reaction kinetics. Gas solid catalytic reactions. Catalyst preparation and properties. Adsorption Isotherms and rate equations. Pore diffusion effects and Effectiveness factor.Non-catalytic gas-solid reactions. Interpretation of kinetic data in gas-liquid and liquid-liquid systems. Enzymatic reactions.

;CL 321;O. Levenspiel, Chemical Reaction Engineering, Wiley Eastern, 2nd ed., 1972. 
J.M. Smith, Chemical Engineering Kinetics, 3rd ed . McGraw Hill, 1980. 
C.G. Hill, Chemical Engineering Kinetics and Reactor Design, Wiley, 1977. 
;;
CL 342;Fuels as source of Energy and Chemical. Conventional (Commercial and non-commercial) and renewable sources of energy. Reserves, production, origin, properties and classification and gasification of coal and biomass. Petroleum refining. Types and properties of gaseous fuels. Combustion calculations. Flame temperature. Velocity of flame propagation. Limits of inflammability. Combustion of coal on grates and in pulverised state. Oil and gas bunners.

;NIL;S. Sarkar, Fuels & combustion, 2nd ed. Orient Longman, Bombay, 1990. 
J.S.S. Brame, J.G. King, Fuels-Solid, Liquid and Gaseous, Edward Arnold, 1967. 
G.W. Himus, Elements of Fuel Technology, Lenard Hill, 1958. 
;;
CL 361;Material behaviour under stresses. Theories of failure. Fabrication methods and their effects. Design methods of atmospheric storage vessels, unfired pressure vessels storage vessel, unfired pressure vessels subjected to internal and external pressure. Vessels for high pressure operations. Agitated vessels, tall columns. Design of process equipment accessories and process piping.

;CL 201;L.E. Brownell and E.H. Young, Process Equipment Design, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1968. 
M.V. Joshi, Process Equipment Design, McMillan, India, 1976. 
R.K.Sinnott, Chemical Engineering, Vol.6, An Introduction to Chemical Engineering Design, lst ed., Pergamon Press, 1989. Appropriate ISI specifications and codes for unfired pressure vessels. 
;;
CL 364;Introduction to measurements. Elements of measuring systems and their functions. Signal transmission. Transmitters- electronic pneumatic etc. Fundamentals of pressure, temperature, flow, level, density and associated measuring systems. Instrumentation flow plan symbols. Introduction of chemical sensors.;NIL;J.P. Bentley, Principles of Measurement Systems, 2nd ed., Longman, London, 1988. 
J.W. Dally, W.F. Riley and K.G. McConnell, Instrumentation of Engineering Measurements, John Wiley and Sons, Singapore, 1984. 
C.S. Rangan, G.R. Sarma and V.S.V. Mani, Instrumentation, Devices and Systems, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1983. 
B.C. Nakra and K.K. Chaudhary, Instrumentation Measurement and Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1985. 
;;
CL 372;Complete design and preparation of working drawings for typical process equipment such as large storage vessels thick walled pressure vessels self supported tall columns agitated pressure vessels with heat transfer requirements etc. Preparation of piping diagram for a typical process.

;CL 361;L.E. Brownell and E.H. Young, Process Equipment Design, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1968. 
M.V. Joshi, Process Equipment Design, McMillan, India, 1976. 
Appropriate ISI specifications and codes for unfired pressure vessels. 
;;
CL 397;;;;;
CL 396;;;;;
CL 401;Adsorption. Types of adsorption. Nature of adsorption. Freundlich equation. Stage wise and continuous adsorption. Rate of adsorption in fixed beds. Fluidised bed adsorbers. Ion exchange. Crystallization : Miers theory. Yield calculations, Types of equipment. Drying : Rate of drying for batch and continuous driers; number and height of transfer units. Membrane separations.,

;CL 302;R.E. Treybal, Mass Transfer Operations, 3rd ed., McGraw Hill, 1981. 
B.D. Smith, Design of Equilibrium Stage Process, McGraw Hill, 1968. 
J.M. Coulson and J.F. Richardson, Chemical Engineering, Vol. II, ELBS, Pergamon Press, 1970. 
;;
CL 402;Discussion on projects in India. Causes for time and cost over runs-some case studies. Project evaluation and assessment of project profitability. Organisation of project Engineering. Basic Engineering data. Project development and commercialisation. Licensing and contract. Plant location and layout. Piping Engineering. Project Engineering management. Selection of alternatives. Selection of plant capacity. Optimum process design - a few examples. Problems of standardisation and commissioning. Project scheduling - its importance. Use of PERT/CPM techniques. 

;NIL;M.S. Peters and K.D. Timmerhaus, Plant Design Economics for Chemical Engineers, 3rd Ed.,McGraw Hill, 1980. 
V.W. Uhl and A.W. Hawkins, Technical Economics for Chemical Engineers, AIChE, 1971. 
J. Modes and Philips, Project Engineering with CPM & PERT, Reinhold. 
;;
CL 411;Experiments in Mass Transfer, Inorganic Process, Process Control Lab.;;;;
CL 412;Experiments in Process Engineering.;;;;
CL 420;Scope and possibilities, characteristics and classification of biological matter, kinetics of microbial growth, balance equations for batch and continuous cultures, kinetics of enzyme catalysed reactions. Analysis of mixed microbial populations.

Design and anlaysis of biological reactors. Production Isolation and utilization of enzymes. Transport phenomena in biological systems.

;NIL;S. Aiba, A.E. Humhrey, N.F. Mills, Biochemical Engineering, 2nd ed, Academic Press, New York, 1973. 
J.E. Bailey, D.F. Ollis, Biochemical Engineering Fundamentals, 2nd ed.,McGraw Hill, 1986. 
B. Atkinson, Biochemical Reactors, Pion Ltd. London, 1974. 
;;
CL 421;Review of Chemical Kinetics and classification of Chemical reactors. Mass and Energy Balance equation in reactor systems. Homogeneous Reactions : Batch reactor design. Productivity of a batch reactor. Adiabatic and nonisothermal operation. Flow reactions. Ideal plug flow and C.S.T.R. Design equations for single and multiple reaction systems. Multiple reactor systems. Recycle and semi-batch reactors. Heterogeneous Reactors : Fluid-solid catalytic fixed-bed reactor design principles. Isothermal, adiabatic and nonisothermal operation. Gas-Solid non catalytic reactor design. Fluidized-bed reactor for gas liquid and liquid-liquid reactions. Optimal temperature sequence and practical implications. Introduction to nonideal reactors. Thermal stability in reactor operation.;;O. Levenspiel, Chemical Reaction Engg. Wiley Eastern, 1972. 
J.M. Smith, Chemical Engineering Kinetics, 3rd ed.,McGraw Hill, 1980. 
H.F. Rase, Chemical Reactor Design, Vol. I, and II, John Wiley & Sons, 1970. 
H.S. Fogler, Chemical Kinetics and Reactor Calculations, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1974. 
;;
CL 424;Heat exchange networks, energy targets, energy recovery, trading off energy against capital, multiple utilities, application of principles, data extraction, heat engines and heat pumps with processes, heat transfer equipment selection, application, problems and examples.;;Users Guide on Process Integration for the Efficient Use of Energy by Institution of Chemical Engineers, 1982. 
A. Kumar, Chemical Process synthesis and Engineering Design, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Co. Ltd., New Delhi, 1981./ 
;;
CL 426;Food Chemistry; Food Microbiology; Aseptic Techniques; Transport in Food processing; Preservation Techniques; Packaging and Storage; Post Harvesting Techniques; Supercritical Extraction. ;;Introduction Food Engineering; R.P. Singh and D.R. Heldman, II Ed., Academic Press, 1993. 
Elements of Food Engineering; E.L. Watson and J.C. Harper, II Ed., Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., 1987. 
Encyclopedia of Food Science, Technology and Nutrition; Eds. R. Macral, R.K. Robinson and M.J. Sadler, 8 volumes, Academic Press, 1993. 
Engineering and Food; McKenna, 2 volumes, Elsevier Applied Science Publications, 1984. 
Food Packaging; Ed. T. Kadiya, Academic Press Inc., 1990. 
Dehydration of Fruits and Vegetables; M. Torrey, Noyes Data Corporation, 1974. 
Food Microbiology; Bourivert, IV Ed., 1986. 
;;
CL 441;(Agrochemical, Electrochemical and Furnace Products)
Chemical Processes based on agricultural and sylvicultural raw materials; sugar, starch, alcohol, cellulose, paper, glyceride oils, soaps, detergents, alkaloids. Principles of electrochemical processes : aqueous and molten systems, caustic soda and chlorine, chlorates, aluminum, sodium : energy storage, Furnace products such as lime, cement, magnesia, phosphorus etc.

;;C.E.Dryden, Outlines of Chemical Technology, Edited and revised by M.Gopala Rao and Marshall Sitting, 2nd ed., 
Affiliated East-West Press, New Delhi, 1973. 
George T.Austin,Shreve"s, Chemical Process Industries, 5th ed., McGraw Hill, 1984. 
C.L. Mantel, Electrochemical Engineering, 4th ed., McGraw Hill, 1960., 
D. Venkateswarlu, Chem. Tech. III Manual of Chemical Technology, Chem. Engg. Education Curriculum Development Centre, I.I.T. Madras, 1977. 
R.E. Kirk and D.F. Othmer, Encycl. Chemical Technology, Interscience, 4th ed., New York, 1991. ;;
CL 442;(Heavy Inorganic and Petrochemicals)
Principles of a few selected unit processes such as oxidation, alkylation, sulphonation, nitration, chlorination and polymerisation. Petrochemicals : Raw materials and principles involved in the production of olefins and aromatics. Acetylene, Butadiene and typical intermediates from olefins and aromatics such as ethylene glycol, ethyl benzene, phenol, cumene and DMT; dyes and pharmaceuticals, coal chemicals. Industrial processes for the production of inorganic heavy chemical such as acids, alkalis, salts and fertilizers. Typical products such as sulphuric, nitric, and phosphoric acids, soda ash, ammonia, superphosphates.

;;C.E.Dryden, Outlines of Chemical Technology, Edited and revised by M.Gopala Rao and Marshall Sitting, 2nd ed., 
Affiliated East-West Press, New Delhi, 1973 
George T.Austin, Shreve"s, Chemical Process Industries, 5th ed., McGraw Hill, 1984. 
P.H. Groggins, Unit processes in organic synthesis, 5th ed., McGraw Hill, 1958. 
R.E. Kirk and D.F. Othmer, Encyl. of Chemical Technology, 4th ed. Interscience, New York, 1991. 
;;
CL 444;Concepts and definition, safety culture, Storage of dangerous materials. Plant layout. Safety systems. Technology and process selection. Scale of disaster. Vapour Cloud Explosions. Control of toxic chemicals. Runway reactions. Relief Systems. Risk and hazard management. Safety versus production. Risk assessment and analysis. Hazard models and risk data. Identification, minimisation and analysis of hazard. Tackling disasters. Plan for emergency. Risk management routines. Emergency shut down systems. Role of computers in safety. Prevention of hazard. Human element. Technology and process selection. Design of safety.;;F.P. Lees, Loss Prevention in Process Industries, Vol. 1 and 2, Butterworth, 1983. 
R.W. King and J. Magid, Industrial Hazards and Safety Handbook, Butterworth, 1982. 
A. Khulman, Introduction to Safety Science, TUV Rheinland, 1986. 
W.E. Baker, Explosion Hazards and Evaluation, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1983. 
O.P. Kharbanda and E.A. Stallworthy, Management of Disasters and How to Prevent them, Grower, 1986. 
;;
CL 448;Concepts and definition, safety culture, Storage of dangerous materials. Plant layout. Safety systems. Technology and process selection. Scale of disaster. Vapour Cloud Explosions. Control of toxic chemicals. Runway reactions. Relief Systems. Risk and hazard management. Safety versus production. Risk assessment and analysis. Hazard models and risk data. Identification, minimisation and analysis of hazard. Tackling disasters. Plan for emergency. Risk management routines. Emergency shut down systems. Role of computers in safety. Prevention of hazard. Human element. Technology and process selection. Design of safety.;;F.P. Lees, Loss Prevention in Process Industries, Vol. 1 and 2, Butterworth, 1983. 
R.W. King and J. Magid, Industrial Hazards and Safety Handbook, Butterworth, 1982. 
A. Khulman, Introduction to Safety Science, TUV Rheinland, 1986. 
W.E. Baker, Explosion Hazards and Evaluation, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1983. 
O.P. Kharbanda and E.A. Stallworthy, Management of Disasters and How to Prevent them, Grower, 1986. 
;;
CL 460;Matrices, their basic properties. Eigenvalues, Eigenvectors, Hamilton-Cayley Theorem and Sylvester"s formula. Matrizant solution of a system of linear differential equations. Applications in multicomponent distillation, transient analysis of a staged absorber. Unsteady state analysis in reactor system. Wei and Prater"s method of estimation of the kinetics of complex reaction scheme., Problems of optimisation and solution methods. Dynamic programming and application to equipment/catalyst optimisation and overall process optimisation.

;NIL;N.R. Amundson, Mathematical Methods in Chemical Engineering, Vol. I, Prentice Hall, 1966. 
M.S. Roberts Dynamic Programming and Applications in Chemical Engineering and Process Control Academic Press. 
D.F. Rudd and C.C. Watson, Strategy of Process Engineering, John Wiley, 1969. 
Advances in Catalysis Vol. 13, 1962. 
V.G. Jensen and G.V. Jeffreys, Mathematical Methods in Chemical Engineering, 2nd ed., Academic Press, 1978. 
;;
CL 461; Introduction. Feedback and Feed forward strategy. Block diagram representation. Feedback control-modes of control action. Steady state analysis. Dynamics of first order systems using transfer functions. Transient analysis. Root locus analysis, Frequency response analysis-open and closed loop stability criteria. Controller selection and tuning. Control valve characteristics and sizing. Cascade control. Feed forward control. Introduction to Digital control principles.

;NIL;P. Harriott Process Control Reprint of text ed. Tata McGraw Hill 1983. 
W.L. Luyben Process Modelling Simulation and Control for Chemical Engineers McGraw Hill 1973. 
G.Stephanopoulos Chemical Process Control: An Introduction to Theory and Practice Prentice Hall New Jersey 1984. 
G.G. Franklin et al Feedback control of Dynamic systems Reading Mass Addison-Wesley Pub. 1986. 
;;
CL 462;Classification of Stochastic Processes. Elements of Probability: Moments of Distribution. Central Limit Theorem. Markov Chains and Markov Processes. Ergodic Probabilities and Periodicity of Markov Chains. Poisson and Birth-death process. Kolmogorav Equations. Weiner Process. Autocorrelation Functions. Stochastic Calculus. Fokker-Planck Density Spectra. Mathematical Modelling of Stochastic Dynamic Systems. Population Balance. Game Theory and Monte Carlo Technique. Application to Residence Time Distribution Theory. Chemical Reaction analysis. Statistical thermodynamics. Control Theory. Reliability Engineering and Parameter Estimation.;;H.J. Larson, B.O.Shubert, Probabilistic models in Engineering Science, John Wiley & Sons, New York, l979., 
N.K.Sinha and B.Kuszta, Modelling and Identification of dynamic systems, Van Norstrand Reinhold Co., New York, 1983., 
L.K.Doraiswamy and R.D.Kulkarni, Analysis of Chemically Reacting Systems, Gordan and Beach Science Publishers, New York, 1987. 
J.H.Seinfield and Leon Lapidus, Mathematical methods in Chemical Engineering Vol.3 Process Modelling, Estimation ,and 
Identification, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1974. 
F.Solomon, Probability and Stochastic Processes, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, l987. 
R. Goodman, Introduction to Stochastic Models, The Benjamin/ Cumming Publishing Company Inc., California, l988. 
;;
CL 472;Application areas of cryogenics, Methods of producing cryogenic temperatures and energy/exergy considerations. Gas liquification processes. Commercial liquefiers and cryogenic refrigerators. Cryogenic recovery and purification of Industrial gases. Thermophysical properties at cryogenic temperatures. Process Design considerations for cryogenic separations. Storage and transportation of cryogenic fluids. Cryogenic insulations and vacuum technology, Measurement techniques and instrumentation. Materials of Construction and their behaviour at cryogenic temperatures;;R.Barron Cryogenic Systems, 2nd ed., McGraw Hill, l985. 
G.G.Haselden, Cryogenic Fundamentals, Academic Press, 1971. 
K.D.Timmerhaus (Editor), Advances in Cryogenic Engineering, McGraw Hill., 
;;
CL 484;Electrochemical Kinetics - transport processes - Mass and Energy balance. Optimization of current density and bus bar. Industrial Calculations. Gas Evolution. Current distribution. Diaphragms. Electrodes. Cell types and design Bus bars.

;NIL;D.J.Pickett, Electrochemical Reactor Design, 2nd ed., Elsevier Science Publishing Co., London, 1979. 
T.Z.Fahidy, Principles of Electrochemical Reaction Engineering, Elsevier Science Publishing Co., London, l985. 
Tutorial Lectures in Electrochemical Engineering, Vol. I & II, AIChE Symposium, l983. 
;;
CL 488;The colloidal State:Definitions, Properties and Forces. Foams and Emulsions. Aerosols. Stability of Colloidal Suspensions, Rheology of suspensions. Settling of colloidal particles. Applications in Chemical Engineering.,

;NIL;P.C.Helmenz, Principles of Surface and Colloid Chemistry, 2nd ed., Marcel Dekker, New York, l986. 
W.B.Russell, D.Saville and W.R.Schowalter, Colloidal Dispersions, Cambridge University Press, 1989. 
C.A.Miller and P.Neogi, Interfacial Phenomena:Equilibrium & dynamic effects, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1985. 
M.J.Rosen, Surfactants and Interfacial Phenomena, 2nd Ed., Wiley, New York, 1989. 
;;
CL 601; Basic concepts and review of classical flow problems, Mathematical foundations. Basic equations of momentum transport in isothermal flow systems and applications of complex flow problems, Macroscopic balances for mass, momentum and mechanical energy. 
Review of fundamentals and classical conduction problems, equations for heat and momentum transfer, and applications. 

Review of classical mass transfer problems and basic equations for diffusion mass transport in binary systems, Heat, mass and momentum transfer in multicomponent systems, Boundary layer theory. 

;;R.B.Bird, W.E.Stewart and E.N.Lightfoot, Transport Phenomena, Wiley International edn., New York, l960 
G.K.Batchelor, An Introduction to Fluid Dynamics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, l967. 
J.C.Slattery, Momentum, Energy and Mass Transfer in Continua, Robert E. Krieger Publishing Company, New York, l98l. 
;;
CL 602; Matrices and Theory of Functions-Matrices and Their Properties, Matrix Polynomial and Matrix Functions, Transformation of Matrices and Canonical Forms, Applications of Matrices, Properties of Function Spaces, Eigenvalue Problems, Orthogonal Polynomials, Linear Operators and their Properties, Partial Differential Equations-Classification of Differential Equations, Methods of Characteristics, Green"s Functions, Similarity Solutions of PDEs, Method of Separation of Variables, Laplace Transforms, Methods of Weighted Residuals, Statistics-Probability Distributions, Random Sampling, Significance Tests, Factorial Design of Experiments, Regression Analysis, Statistical Modelling. ;;Amundson, N.R., Mathematical Methods in Chemical Engineering: Matrices and Their Applications, Prentice Hall, New Jersey (1966) 
Finlayson, B.A., Method of Weighted Residuals and Variational Principles, Academic Press (1972) 
Kreyszig, E., Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 6th Edition, Wiley, New York (1988) 
Box, G.E.P. Hunter, W.G. and Hunter, J.S. Statistics for Experiments, Wiley, New York (1978) 
;;
CL 603; Introduction to Process Optimization; Formulation of Various Process Optimization Problems and their Classification; Basic Concepts of Optimization-Convex and Concave Functions, Necessary and sufficient conditions for Stationary Points; Optimization of one-dimensional Functions; Unconstrained Multivariable Optimization- Direct Search Methods. Indirect First Order and Second Order Methods; Linear Programming and its Applications; Constrained Multivariable Optimization-Necessary and Sufficient Conditions for Constrained Optimum, Quadratic Programming, Generalized Reduced Gradient Method, Successive Linear and Quadratic Programming; Optimization of Staged and Discrete Processes, Dynamic Programming, Integer and Mixed Integer Programming. ;;T.F.Edgar and D.M.Himmelblau, Optimization of Chemical Processes, McGraw Hill International Editions, Chemical Engineering Series (1989) 
G.S.Beveridge and R.S.Schechter, Optimization Theory and Practice, Mc Graw Hill, New York l970. 
Rekllaitis, G.V., Ravindran, A. and Ragsdell, K.M., Engineering Optimization-Methods and Applications, John Wiley, New York (1983) 
;;
CL 605; Stoichiometric representation. Isothermal ideal reactors. 
Recycle. Thermodynamic considerations and reactor energy balances. Reactor stability. Concepts of nonideality. Segregated flow and maximum mixedness. Mixing models. Catalysis. Catalyst structure and characterization. External and internal mass transfer. 

Non-isothermal considerations. Fixed, moving and fluidised bed reactors. Non-catalytic gas-solid reactions. Gas-liquid reactions and mass transfer models. Contactors,and reactor design considerations. 

;;Fogler, H.S., Elements of Chemical Reaction Engineering, Prentice Hall, New Jersey (1986) 
Froment, F.G. and Bischoff, K.B., Chemical Reactor Analysis and Design, Wiley, New York (1990) 
Smith, J.M. Chemical Engineering Kinetics, 3rd ed., Mc. Graw Hill, New York (1981) 
;;
CL 607; Fundamental concepts of classical and statistical thermodynamics. 
Intermolecular forces and potential energy functions. Molecular theory of corresponding states. 

Thermodynamic properties and multicomponent multiphase equilibria from Equations of state. 

Extensive computer calculations for generation of phase equilibrium data, e.g. VLE, LLE, G-L-E, S-L-E, S-F-E, L-F-E and their combinations, phase equilibria at extreme conditions. Molecular theories of solutions, and, activity coefficient models. 

Biothermodynamics of dilute aqueous systems. Thermodynamics of polymer solutions and colloidal systems. 

;;Prausnitz, J.M., Lichtenthaler R.M. and Azevedo, E.G; "Molecular thermodynamics of fluid-phase Equilibria, 2nd edition prentice Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey (1986) 
Reid R.C., Prausnitz J.M. and Poling B.E., "The properties of Gases & Liquids", 4th ed. McGraw Hill, New York (1987) 
Edsall J.T. & Gutfreund H., "Biothermodynamics", John Wiley & Sons Ltd., New York (1983) 
;;
CL 691;Experimental techniques related to: thermal analysis, Particle size analysis, separation processes, vapour-liquid equilibria, chemical analysis by absorption and other spectra, microscopy, sensors, electrochemical, Photochemical & other reactors, etc. 
Errors and error control, convergence, liners algebraic equations, matrix inversion and matrix eigen values estimation, solution of non-linear algebraic equations, Newton-Raphson technique and homotropy. Interpolation and quadratures, orthogonal polynomials. Solution of ordinary differential equations Runge Kutta techniques, predictor-corrector method and orthogonal collocation. Solution of partial differential equations, explicit and implicit techniques, method of weighted residuals. Single and multivariable regressions, Monte Carlo techniques. 

;;Constantinides, A., Applied Numerical Methods with personal Computers, McGraw Hill, New York (1987) 
Cornhan B., Luther, H.A., Wilkes, J.O., Applied Numerical Methods, Wiley, New York (1969) 
Chapra S.C. and Canale, R.P. Numerical Methods of Engineers, McGraw Hill, New York (1989) 
Kreyszig, E., Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 6th Ed., Wiley, New York (1988) 
;;
CL 611;Introduction to Electrochemical Process and Reactors. 
Electrochemical reactor Characteristics such as space time yield and current, voltage and energy efficiencies. Material and Energy balances for the reactor. 

Electrode Thermodynamics and Kinetics; Buler-Volmer and Tafel Equations. Current/Potential transient responses. 

Electrocatalysis surface modified Electrodes and Redox couples. 

Transport processes in Electrochemical systems, Ionic flux equation and Differential material balance in the electrolyte. 

Lapels Equation and its application to Primary and Secondary current distribution. 

Convective and diffusional mass transfer at different electrode geometric under laminar and turbulent flow regimes. Plug flow and CSIR models for electrolytic reactors. Current distribution for long electrodes under limiting and non-limiting conditions. Influence of gas evolution on current distribution. 

Reactors with recycle; Cascade flow through a series of CSTRs; Batch and semibatch reactors; Extends surface (Particulate bed) reactor with packed and fluidized electrodes. 

;;Pickett, D.J. Electrochemical Reactor Design, 2nd Ed., Elsevier Scientific Publishing Co., London, (1979) 
Fahidi, T.Z., Principles of Electrochemical Reactor Analysis, Elsevier Scientific Publishing Co., London (1985) 
White, R.E., Electrochemical Cell Design, Plenum Press, New York (1984) 
Electrochemical Engineering, Institute of Chemical Engineers, Pergamon Press, (1986) 
;;
CL 613;Classification of Chemical Engineering Systems-Lumped Parameter/Distributed Parameter, Linear/Nonlinear, Stochastic/Deterministic; Dimensional Analysis-Scale-up of Equipment, Analysis in the Absence/presence of Mathematical Models; Modelling and Simulation of Heat Transfer Equipment including Special Purpose Heat Exchangers; Agitators and Mixing Equipment-Scale-up Methods, Staged Columns- Hydrodynamic Modelling of Trays, Applications to Absorption and Distillation; Continuous contactors-Hydrodynamic Considerations and Flow Modelling; Modelling of Fluid Solid Operations-Crystallizers. 
Fluidization Equipment, Grinders. 

;;Bisio, A., and Kabel, R.L., Scale-up of Chemical Processes, Wiley-Interscience, New York (1985). 
Davis, M.E., Numerical Methods and Modelling for Chemical Engineers, Wiley , New York (1984). 
Denn , M.M. Process Modelling, Wiley, New York (1986). 
Finlayson, B.A., Nonlinear Analysis in Chemical Engineering, McGraw Hill, New York (1980). ;;
CL 617;RGA analysis, pairing, multiloop tuning, multivariable frequency domain techniques. Linear quadratic control, Gain and phase margins,Time delay, tolerance, Quadratic weight selection, estimator design, Controller design using estimators; loop shaping. 
Model Predictive control, discrete control, model selection and parameter estimation, constraint handling, Applications to Chemical Engineering Systems. 

;;Prett D.M., and Garcia, C.E., Fundamentals of Process Control, Butterworths, Boston (1988) 
Anderson B.D.D., and Moore, J.B., Optimal Control-Linear Quadratic Methods, Prentice-Hall (India), New Delhi (1989) 
Kwqakernaak, H. and Sivan, R., Linear Optimal Control Systems, Wiley Interscience, New York (1972) 
;;
CL 620;Chemistry of Petroleum hydrocarbons, Composition of petroleum, and petroleum products. Physico-chemical and thermodynamic properties of petroleum products and their characterization. Oil field refining operations-Dehydration, Desalting, Gas separation. 
Natural gas production and gas sweetening. Refinery operations and vacuum distillation. Sequencing of distillation columns. 

Distillation column design. Tube still heater design. 

;;W.L.Nelson, Petroleum Refinery Engineering, McGraw Hill, New York, 1961. 
R.J.Hengateback, Petroleum Refining, McGraw Hill, New York 1959. 
V.Y.Stern, Gas phase oxidation, Pergamon, London l964. Steiner, H., ;;
CL 629;  Forces affecting a molecular system. Cohesive energy and polymers, Mechanisms and methods of polymerisation. Design features of polymerisation reactors. New applications of polymers such as in membranes; typical features of natural polymers such as cellulose and rubber. ;;Kaufman, H.S. and Falcetta, J.T., `Introduction to Polymer Science and Technology, SPE Textbook, Wiley Intersciences, New York (1977). 
Mark, H.F. and Gaylord, N.C., Encyclopedia of Polymer Sci.& Tech., 2nd ed. Interscience, (1989) 
Blow, C.M., Rubber Technology and Manufacture, 2nd ed., Butterworths, London, (1982) 
Brown, R.M.: Cellulose and other natural polymer systems: Biogenesis, Structure and degradation, Plenum Press, New York, (1982) 
;;
CL 632;Introduction, rheological behaviour of melts, analysis of simple flows, extrusion - flows, Extrusion - flow analysis, Injection Moulding, RIM, blow moulding, Calendering, Crystallisation, Mixing -analysis of Fine spinning, film forming methods. ;;Middleman, S., Fundamentals of Polymer Processing, McGraw Hill, New York, 1977. 
Pearson, J.R.A., Mechanics of Polymer Processing, Elsevier Science Publishing, London, 1985. 
Bird, R.B., R.C.Armstrong, O.Hassager, Dynamics of Polymeric Liquids, Vol.I & II, Wiley,New York, 1977. 
Tadmor, Z., and C.G.Gogos, Principles of Polymer Processing, Wiley-International, New York, l979. 
;;
CL 659; Bioresources, Biomolecules, Enzyme and enzyme kinetics, Case study of a commercial enzyme process. 
General microbiology, metabolic stoichiometry and energetic, molecular genetics, microbial kinetics and reactors. Case studies in microbial processes. 

;;Bailey, J.E. and Ollis, D.F.,"Biochemical Engineering Fundamentals", 2nd Ed., McGraw Hill, New York, 1986. 
Aiba, S., Humphrey, J., Biochemical Engineering, Academic Press, 1973. 
Reed, G., Food Sciences and Technology, Academic Press, 1975. 
Prescott, S.C., Dunn, C.G., Industrial Microbiology, McGraw Hill, New York, 1960 & 1983 edns. 
;;
CL 640;The economic aspects of corrosion. Case studies. Some examples of catastrophic corrosion failures. Corrosion inspection, instrumentation and monitoring. Principal engineering materials for equipment. Corrosion of Stainless Steel. 
Use of DSA in electrochemical industries. Corrosion control using exotic materials. 

Fabrication of special alloys, Stainless Steels, less common metals, Composite materials, plastics etc. welding techniques and corrosion behaviour of weldments. Design aspects of minimize corrosion. Chemical cleaning of equipment; Corrosion and Control methods for water supply systems, cooling systems, hot water systems, underground and marine environments. Corrosion in nuclear reactors and boilers. Corrosion in pipelines. Internal and external protection of pipelines. Corrosion of reinforcements in concrete structures. 

Design of cathodic and anodic protection systems. Selection of materials for sacrifical anodes-anodes for impressed current methods of protection. Corrosion control in industrial environments. 

Temporary corrosion prevention methods and use of inhibitors industry. 

;;Shavartz, G.L. and Kristal, M.M., Corrosion of Chemical Apparatus, Chapman Hall Ltd., London, (1959) 
;;
CL 643;Distribution coefficients; Design variables; General short-cut methods; Rigorous methods of absorption, extraction and distillation; Azeotropic and extractive distillation; Actual plates; Design of packed columns. ;;B.D.Smith, Design of Equilibrium Stage Processes, McGraw Hill, New York 1963. 
C.D.Holland, Fundamentals of Multicomponent Distillation, McGraw Hill, New York 1981. 
;;
CL 644;Review of enzyme and microbial kinetics, metabolic stoichiometry. 
Kinetics of substrate utilization, product formation and biomass production in cell cultures. Growth and product formation in filamentous organisms. Thermal death kinetics for cell and spores. Transport phenomena in Bioprocess systems. Mass Transfer, heat transfer and power input calculations for different kinds of fermentors, and for Newtonian and non-Newtonian fermentation broths. 

Design and Analysis of biological reactors: Case studies in Fermentation, Enzymatic and Waste treatment bioprocess design. 

Experiments to illustrate bioprocesses. 

;;Bailey J.E., and Ollis, D.F., "Biochemical Engineering Fundamentals", 2nd Edn., McGraw-Hill Intl. Edn., New York (1986). 
Fiechter, Ghose, T.K. Blakebrough, N., Advances in Biochemical Engineering Series, Springier-Verlag, Berlin. 
;;
CL 604; Introduction to Process Plant Simulation, Various Approaches to Plant Simulation, Steady-State Sequential Modular Simulation Techniques, Equation Oriented Simulation Techniques, Simultaneous Modular Simulation Techniques; Steady-state Commercial Simulation Packages, Problem Solving using Selected Commercial Simulators; Dynamic Simulation, Commercial Dynamic Simulators and Their Applications. ;;Crowe, C.M., Hamielec, A.E., Hoffman, T.W., Johnson, A.I., Woods, D.R. and Shannon, P.T., Chemical Plant Simulation, Prentice Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliff, New Jersey. (1971) 
Westerberg, A.W., Hutchison, H.P., Motard, R.L. and Winter, Process Flowsheeting, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1979) 
Husain, Asghar, Chemical Process Simulation, Wiley Eastern Limited, New Delhi (1986) 
Luyben, William, Process Modelling, Simulation and Control for Chemical Engineers, McGraw Hill, New York (1990). 
;;
CL 638;Principles involved in producing olefins and diolefins and their separation. Design aspects of the crackers, Reforming to produce aromatics and their separation. 
Oxidation to produce oxides, epoxides, aldhydes, alcohols etc., Mechanisms and data processes. 

Chemical reactions and as alkylation halogenation, amination, hydrogenation-dehydrogenation to produce intermediate and end-products. 

Polymerisation-principle and practices with respect to a few polymers based on petrochemical feedstock. 

;;Hobson G.D., and Pohl, W., Modern Petroleum Technology, Applied Science Publishers, 4th Ed. (1973) 
Kobe, K.A. and Mc Ketta, J.J., Advances in Petroleum Chemistry and Refining, Intersciences, New York (1958-1965) 
Asinger, F., Mono-olefins, Chemistry and Technology, Pergamon Press, New York (1974) 
;;
CL 652;Adsorption separations : Review of fundamentals, mathematical modelling of column contactors, Pressure swing adsorption. Ion chromatography, Affinity chromatrography, Graient chromatography, Parametric pumping, Countercurrent, Simulated countercurrent and multidimensional chromatrography. 
Membrane Separation Processes: Classification, Chemistry, Structure and Characteristics, Thermodynamic considerations, mass transfer considerations. Design consideration for RO, UF and ED. Pervaporation, Gaseous Separations; Newer applications. 

;;Wankat, P.C., Large Scale Adsorption and Chromatography, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fl. 1986. 
Rousseau, R.W. (ed.), Handbook of Separation Process Technology, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1987. 
Sourirajan, S. and Matsura, T., Reverse Osmosis and Ultra-filtration-Process Principles, NRC Publication No.24188, Ottawa, 1985. 
Porter M.C.(ed.), Handbook of Industrial Membrane Technology, Noyes Publication, Park Ridge, New Jersey, 1990. 
;;
CL 612;Phase separation and settling behaviour. Description of general two phase systems. Slip and hold-up effect; Horizontal and vertical flow of gas liquid, liquid-liquid, and liquid-solid, gas-solid mixtures; Motion in fluidized beds: Jets and sprays; Chemical reaction in transport systems; Heat and mass transfer effects in suspension flow. ;;S.L.Sook, Fluid Dynamics of Multiphase Systems, Blaisdell Pub. Co. London, 1967. 
G.W.Govier and K.Aziz, The flow of Complex Mixtures in Pipes, Von Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York, 1972. 
;;
CL 614;Thermal Processes-Thermal cracking, Coking, Pyrolysis, Visbreaking; Design of thermal cracking unit, Catalytic Processes-Catalytic Cracking, Catalytic reforming, Application of molecular sieve for refinery processes. Hydrogenation Processes-Hydrogenation, Hydrocracking, Hydro refining, Hydrofinishing,Hydro-desulfurisation. ;;Nelson, W.L., Petroleum Refinery Engineering, McGraw Hill, New York (1961) 
Hengstebeck, R.J., Petroleum Refining, McGraw Hill, New York (1959) 
Steiner, H., Introduction to Petroleum Chemicals Industry, Pergamon, London, 1961) 
V.Y. Stern, Gas Phase Oxidation, Pergamon, London, (1964) 
;;
CL 615;Classification of polymerization reactions, Chain chemical reactions and Polyaddition, Reaction mechanisms and rate equations; Order of polymerization reaction; Molecular weight distribution in batch and continuous reactors; Average molecular weight and experimental determinations based on viscosity osmotic pressure etc. polymerization; Semi-batch reactor operation; Design of batch and continuous reactors. Heat removal from polymerisers. 
Heterogeneous polyaddition reactors; Suspension and Emulsion polymerization; Smith-Ewart`s theory and Stockmayers equation; Continuous emulsion polymerization; Anionic and cationic polyaddition; Co-polymerization; Mayo`s equation and reactivity ratio; Alfreg-Price equation; Rate of copolymerization and y factor; Skiest`s equation. 

Polycondensation reactions; Flory`s equation and molecular weight distribution; Molecular weight regulations. 

Typical case studies involving the analysis of polymerisers. 

;;G.M.Burnett, Mechanism of Polymer Reactions; Interscience, New York,1954. 
F.M.Bovey, A.J.Medalia, E.J.Meachan and I.M.Kolthoff, Emulsion Polymerization; Interscience, New York 1955. 
G.E.Harn, Copolymerization, Interscience, New York 1969. 
Mark, H., Bikalis et al, (Ed Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and Engineering, Interscience, New York (1989) 
;;
CL 656;Colloidal Forces: van der Waals attraction, Electrical double layer repulsion, Forces due to dissolved polymers, Brownian Forces and Hydrodynamic Forces. Stability of Colloidal Dispersions, Rheology of Colloidal Dispersions Interface and Interfacial tension, Capillary Phenomena, Rheology of Interfaces, Thin-film Hydrodynamics. 
Science and Technology of Surfactants. 

;;Heimenz, P.C. "Principles of Surface Colloid Chemistry" 2nd edition, Marcel Dekker, New York (1986) 
Russel, W.B. Saville, D. and Schowalter, W.R.,"Colloidal Dispersions", Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1989) 
Miller, C.A. and Neogi, P., "Interfacial Phenomena", Marcel Dekkar, New York (1985) 
Rosen, M.J., "Surfactant and Interfacial Phenomena", Wiley, New York (1978) 

;;
cl 609;Sources of water, air and land pollution; Legislation and standards; Analysis of pollution; Design of waste-water and industrial effluent treatment; Specification of Clean technologies and recovery schemes of useful chemicals.
Air pollution and its measurement; Design of pollution abatement systems for particulate matter and gaseous constituents; Hazardous waste disposal and treatment; Solid-waste disposal and recovery of useful products through chemical and biological methods. 

;;Mahajan, S.P., Pollution Control in Process Industries, Tata-McGraw Hill, (1985) 
N.L.Nemerow, Liquid waste of Industry - Theories, Practices and Treatment, Addison Wesley, New York 1971. 
W.J.Weber, Physico-Chemical Processes for Water Quality Control, Wiley Interscience, New York 1969. 
W.Strauss, Industrial gas Cleaning, Pergamon, London 1975. 
A.C.Stern, Air Pollution, Volumes I to VI, Academic Press, New York 1968. 
;;
CL 648;Extraction Processes-Dearomatisation of lube stocks, gas oils, kerosene for ATF, and light fractions for B-T-X, Dewaxing-Physical dewaxing, solvent dewaxing, urea dewaxing. 
Deoiling of wax. Wax production, Deasaphlating-Propane deasphalting; Production of asphalt and bitumens, Sulfuric Acid refining - Production of speciality products. Clay refining and decolorisation. Lubricants and tribological properties. Additives and their performance characteristics. Greases, their production and characterization. 

;;Kalichevskey, W.A. Petroleum Refining with Chemicals, Elsevier, Amsterdam (1967) 
Gunderson and Hartz, Synthetic Lubricants, Elsevier, Amsterdam (1970) 
Bonner, Industrial Greases, Wiley Interscience, New York (1984)Bell, Commercial Waxes, Academic Press, London (1986) 
;;
CL 660;Process control objectives for Process plants, multiechelon and multi-level decomposition of the plant hierarchical structure for process control, decomposition of tasks. 
Features of distributed control systems and advanced DCS algorithms, inferential control, principles of SQC for online control. 

Online data reconciliation, Process model parameter estimation and optimization. Case studies. 

Robust control, H and H control 

;;Arkun, Y. and Ray, W.H., eds., Chemical Process Control-CPC-IV, AIChE (1991) 
Prett, D.M. and Garcia, C.E. Fundamentals of Process Control, Butterworths, Boston, 1988 
Morari, M. and firion, Z. Robust Process Control, Prentice Hall, London (1988) 
;;
CL 608;Gross behaviour of fluidized beds, Minimum fluidizing velocity and pressure drops; Voidage, transport disengaging height; Bubbles in dense beds, Davidson Model, stream of bubbles, bubbling bed models, Emulsion phase, Turn-over rate of solids, residence time distribution diffusion model of solids movement, interchange coefficient into and out of wake; Diffusion model for gas flow; two region models, evaluation of interchange coefficients. 
Mass and heat transfer between fluids and solid from bubbling bed model; Catalytic conversion from bubbling bed model; contacting efficiency; application to successive reactions; Theories and bed-wall heat transfer; comparison of theories; Entrainment and elutrition, application of entrainment model; Residence time distribution and size distribution of solids in fluidized beds, particles of changing size; Circulation rates of solids, flow of high and low bulk density mixtures; Design for catalytic reactors; Design for noncatalytic gas-solid reactors. 

;;J.F.Davidson and D. Harrison, Fludization, Academic Press, 1971. 
D.Kunil and O. Levenspiel, Fludization Engineering, John Wiley, 1969. 
F.A. Zenz and D.F. Othmer, Fludization and Fluid Particles Systems, Reinhold Publishing, 1960. 
;;
CL 631;Review of chemical kinetics; Homogeneous catalysis; Acid base catalysis; Heterogeneous catalysis; Adsorption-physical and chemical surface area, pore size and pore volume determination; reaction rates and selectivity; Role of diffusion in catalysis; Polymerization in emulsions; Selection, preparation and evaluation of catalysts. ;;J.M.Thomas and W.J.Thomas, Introduction to the principles of Heterogeneous Catalysis, Academic Press, 1967. 
C.N.Satterfield and T.K.Sherwood, The Role of Diffusion in Catalysis, Addison Wesley, 1963. 
P.H.Emmett (Ed.), Catalysis, Reinhold, 1954. 
;;
CL 670;Surfactant based Separation: Fundamentals of surfactants at surfaces and in solution, liquid membrane permeation, Foam separations, Micellar separations. 
External field-induced separations: Electric field and magnetic field induced separations, centrifugal separations. 

Supercritical fluid extraction: hysiochemical principles, thermodynamic modelling, process synthesis and energy analysis, Case studies. 

;;Hatton, T.A. in Scamehorn, J.F. and Harwell, J.H. eds., "Surfactant based separation Processes", Vol. 23 Surfactant science series, Marcel-Dekkar Inc., New York (1989) 
Burgen, R. ed., "Protein Purification - micro to macro" A.R. Liss, New York, 1987) 
McHugh M.A. and Krukonis, V.J. "Supercritical fluid extraction". Butterworths, Boston (1985). 
;;
CL 655;Multicomponent diffusion, Nernst-Planck and Stefan-Maxwel equations, mass transfer models, enhancement and effectiveness factors, model contactors, mass transfer with complex reaction scheme, multiphase systems involving more than two phases, types or reactors and their characteristics, residence time distribution and micromixing, dispersion and coalescence, population balance, reactor models, Sparged and stirred reactors, packed bed and trickle bed reactors, plate column reactors, fluid bed reactors foam bed reactors. ;;Froment, G.F. and Bischoff, K.B. Chemical Reactor Analysis and Design, 2nd Ed. Wiley New York (1990) 
Danckwerts, P.V., Gas-liquid, McGraw Hill, New York (1970) 
Rodriguez A., Callo J.M. and Sweed, N. Ed., Multiphase Chemical Reactors, Sijthoff and Noordhoff (1981) 
Doraiswamy L.K. and Sharma, M.M. Heterogeneous Reactions, Vol. 2, Wiley New York (1984). 
;;
CL 682;Computer Aided Design and Engineering Tools-Process Simulators, Data Base Management Systems, Graphics Applications, Expert Systems, Problems Solving in the Areas of Process Synthesis, Process Design and Optimization, Mechanical Design of Equipment; Computer Aided Engineering -PFD, P & ID, Pipe Sizing, Equipment and Piping Layouts; Case Studies. ;;Leesley, M.L. (Editor), Computer Aided Process Plant Design, (1982) 
Westerberg, A.W. (Editor), Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Foundations of Computer Aided Process Design, (1984) 
;;
CE 201; Rigid and deformable solids; Method of Sections ; Concept of stress; normal and shearing stresses ; concept of strain, normal and shear strains; stress-strain diagram, Hooke"s law; deflection of axially loaded members; state of stress and strain at a point, Generalized Hooke"s law ; Axial force, shear and bending moment diagrams ; bending and shearing stresses in beams of symmetrical cross-section ; Shear flow ; Limitations of the theory ; Torsion of circular shafts ; Combined stresses ; Problems involving axial forces and bending moments and torsion ; Principle of superposition and its limitations ; Transformation of plane stress and strain ; Principal stresses and strains ; Mohr circle; Rosettes; Simple indeterminate problems ; Bending deflection of beams by direct integration and moment area methods ; Buckling of compression members ; Elastic strain energy and deflection computation. Inelastic bending of beams ; Design of members ; Simple thermal/lack of fit problems.

;CE;S.M.A. Kazimi, Solid Mechanics, First Revised Edition, Fourth Reprint, Tata McGraw-Hill, New Delhi, 1988. 
E.P. Popov, Mechanics of Materials, Second Edition, SI Version, Prentice Hall of India, 1978. 
E.P. Popov, Introduction to Mechanics of Solids, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi, 1973. 
I.H. Shames, Introduction to Solid Mechanics, Second Edition, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi, 1989. 
S.H. Crandall, N.C. Dahl land T.J. Lardner, An Introduction to the Mechanics of Solids, Second Edition, McGraw Hill Kogakusha, Tokyo, 1972. 
;;
CE 202;Analysis of statically determinate structures trusses, frames, arches, cables etc. Influence lines for determinate Structures Energy methods and computation of displacements. Analysis by force method, including general calculation of statical redundancy for indeterminate structures such as trusses, continuous beams and frames, arches etc.;;C.H. Norris, J.B. Wiblur and S. Utku, Elementary Structural Analysis, Third Edition, McGraw Hill, International Student Edition, Tokyo, 1976. 
S.P. Timoshenko and D.H. Young, Theory of Structures, Kogakusha-McGraw - Hill, 1965. 
H.H. West, : Analysis of Structures", John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1980. 
;;
CE 204;Design data surveys : 
Control surveys-horizontal and vertical; Topographic Mapping Route Surveys. Traversing-compass, theodolite and plane table, levelling-spirit and trigonometrical; tactrometry and subtense measurements ; areas and volumes; setting out works. 
;;B.C. Punmia, Surveying, 11th edition, Vol. I and II, Luxmi Publishers, New Delhi 1988. 
R.E. Davis, F.S. Foote and J.W. Kelly, Surveying; Theory and Practice, McGraw-Hill Book Co., NY, 7th edition 1980. 
D. Clark, Plane and Geodetic Surveying, Constable, London, Vol. I and III. 
;;
CE 205;Definition, properties and classification of fluids. Kinematics of fluid flow. Generalized continuity equation. Irrotational motion and solutions to Laplace equation. Dynamics of fluid flow. Euler and Bernouli"s theorems. Impulse momentum theory and applications. Flow of fluids in closed conduits. Laminar and turbulent flows in the light of boundary layer concepts. Darcy-Weisbach equation, Moody"s diagram. Minor losses. Drag on immersed bodies, concepts of separation, drag force, circulation and lift force. Dimensional Analysis, Model Similitude theory and applications.;;R.A. Granger, Fluid Mechanics, Holt Reinhart and Winstaw, 1985. 
V.L. Streeter E.B. and Wylie, Fluid Mechanics, McGraw Hill Book Co., 1983. 
R.L. Daugherthy, J.B. Franzini, E.J. Finnermore; "Fluid Mechanics; with Engineering Applications", McGraw Hill, International Ed: 1989. 
P.N. Modi, S.M. Seth, Hydraulics and Fluid Mechanics; Standard Book House, New Delhi, 1991. 
;;
CE 206;Introduction to Navier-Stokes equations. Exact solutions for simple cases of flow, plane Poiseuilee flow. Couette flow. Hydro-dynamics of lubrications problems. Problems of flow through porous media. Application of boundary layer theory to concepts of flow separation phenomena, circulation and lift. Aerofoil characteristics. Network theory as applied to pipe grids. Unsteady flow in close conduits. Functions of a surge chamber.;CE 205;R.A. Granger, Fluid Mechanics, Holt Reinhart and Winstaw, 1985. 
V.L. Speeter and EB Wylie, Fluid Mechanics, McGraw Hill Book Co.,1983. 
R.L. Daugherthy, J.B. Franzini, E.J. Finnermore; "Fluid Mechanics with Engineering Applications", McGraw Hill, International Ed: 1989. 
Herman Schlichting : Boundary Layee Theory; McGraw Hill, 1979. 
;;
CE 208;Building bye-laws and general requirements. General planning of structures-foundations, wall, floor and roof systems-types of construction-Mechanisation-site organization-planning, evaluation and control of projects. Introduction to PERT/CPM-engineering economy in construction.;;National building code of India, Indian Standards Institutions , New Delhi, 1970. 
Pilcher, Principles of Construction Management McGraw-Hill, 1981. 
B.C. Punmia, Building Construction, Sambha and Co., New Delhi, 1986. 
J. Strand, Advanced Building Construction, B.T. Batsford. 
;;
CE 210;Essentials of water and wastewater engineering systems. Quantities of water, sanitary waste water and storm water. Variation of water demand and wastewater quantity. Design period. Population forecast. Sources of water and their yield. Intakes and infiltration works. Pumping and transportation of water. Water distribution systems planning and analysis. Service reservoirs. Pipes, valve and fittings. Water and wastewater plumbing systems. Wastewater collection, Design of sewerage systems, pumping of wastewater. Water and wastewater characteristics. Microbiology of water and wastewater. Water borne diseases. Drinking water standards. Effluent standards. Aquatic and land disposal of wastewater. Stream sanitation. Unit operations and processes of water and water treatment.;;G.M. Fair, J.C. Geyer, D.A. Okan, Elements of Water Supply and Wastewater Disposal, John Wiley and Sons Inc., 1971. 
Howard Peary, D.R. Rowe, G. Tchobanoglous, Environmental Engineering, McGraw Hill Book Co., 1986. 
G.S. Birdie, J.S. Birdie, Water supply and Sanitary Engineering, Dhanpatrai and Sons, New Delhi 1992. 
C.P.H.E.E.O., Manual on Water Supply and Treatment, Ministry of Urban Development, New Delhi, 1991. 
;;
CE 211;Experiment on axial tension of mild steel and cast iron ; compression on concrete; bending of beams ; buckling of columns.
Experiments on shear centre; continuous and interconnected beams; unsymmetrical bending of angle sections; buckling of columns of various cross-section and end conditions.

;;David, Troxell, Inspection and Testing of Engineering Materials, Wskocil. 
;;
CE 213;Study Experiments : 
Ideal fluid motion part a two dimensional circular cylinder by means of an electrical analog; study of boundary layer growth in a wind tunnel. Drag on a circular cylinder, Minor transition losses in pipes. Determination of friction factor of pipes. Flow measurement by Orifices, venturimeter and notches; computations of various coefficients in involving jet flow through orifice. Demonstration experiments. Bernoulli apparatus, Reynolds apparatus, Magnus effect. 
;;Lamox W.R. ; Laboratory work in Hydraulics, Granada Publishers, London, 1979. 
S. Narasimhan : Fluid Mechanics Laboratory A Manual for Experiment, Curriculum Development Programme, I.I.T. Bombay, 1982. 
;;
CE 215; Drawing of various details of residential buildings, framed buildings in steel and concrete. Industrial and laboratory buildings. Principles of planning. Relation of frame work details, floors and roofing systems, Masonary, load bearing and non-load bearing walls. Working drawings of buildings. Quantity surveying and estimating. Specifications and analysis of rates.;;B.N. Dutta, Estimating and Costing, Tagor Palli, Lucknow, 1991. 
P.L. Basin, Quantity Surveying, S. Chand and Company, Delhi. 
G.H. Cooper, Building Construction and Estimating, McGraw-Hill, 1971. 
;;
CE 216;Horizontal control-compass, plane table and theodolite traversing; plotting traverses and mapping details ; vertical control-spirit levelling, tacheometry and trigonometric levelling; curve setting.;;;;
CE 218;Application of Hele-Shaw Model to compute dam seepage. Deformation of fluid viscosity for Hagen Poiseuille flow conditions. Electric analog for the pipe solution networks. Flow net studies around circular cylinder. Verification of Darcy"s law.
;;Lamox W.R. : Laboratory Work in Hydraulics Granada Publishers, London 1979. 
S. Narasimhan (Ed.) : Engineering Fluid Mechanics Vol. II, Orient Longmans Ltd., New Delhi, 1973. 
V.L. Streeter, E.B. Wylie, Fluid Mechanics, McGraw Hill, 1985. 

;;
CE 301;Open channel flow. Energy, momentum and pressure correction factors of momentum and energy equations. Specific force. Properties of critical flow. Uniform flow, its properties, design of channels for uniform flow. Gradually varied flow theory, profile computation and use in design of channels. Rapidly varied flow, flow over spillways, hydraulic jump, its location, control and stabilization. Unsteady flow, basic equations, uniformly progressive flow, velocity of flood wave discharge for unsteady flow, flood routing (reservoir and stream flow).;;V.T. Chow, "Open Channel Hydraulics, McGraw Hill, 1975. 
K.G. Rangaraju, "Flow in Open Channels Tata McGraw Hill Publication Co. Ltd., New Delhi, 1993. 
K. Subramanya, "Flow in Open Channels Tata McGraw Hill Publication Co. Ltd., New Delhi, 1992. 
R.H. French, "Open channel Hydraulics McGraw Hill Book Co., New York 1986. 
;;
CE 302;Geodetic surveying ; triangulation and precise levelling theory of errors ; method of least squares, adjustment of surveying observations ; precision and accuracy evaluation ; electronic measurements in surveying ; field astronomy-fundamentals. Spherical trigonometry, determination of terrestrial co-ordinates and Azimuth.;CE 204;G.L. Hosmer, Geodesy, John Wiley and Sons, N.Y. 1930. 
B.C. Punmia, Surveying, 11th edition. Vol. II and III, Luxmi Pub., New Delhi, 1988. 
J.B. Mackie, The Elements of Astronomy for Surveyors, Charles Griffith and Co. Ltd., Great Britain, 1985. 
C.D. Bumside, Electromagnetic distance measurement. Crosby Lockwood and Sons Limited, London. 
Paul R. Wolf, Elements of Photogrammetry, McGraw Hill, New York, 1974. 
;;
CE 303;Origin, evaluation and classification of soils, soil water statics, surface tension, capillary attraction. Effective stress, consistency, flow through soils, flow nets. Laboratory and field compaction, stresses in soil, contact pressure, consolidation, settlement of compressible layers. Strength and stress-strain characteristics. Shear strength of granular and cohesive soils. Failure theories.;;R.F. Craig, Soil Mechanics, ELBS & Van Nostrand, 4th Edition, 1987. 
R.B. Peck, W.E. Hanson and T.H. Thornburn, Foundation Engineering, John Wiley, 1963. 
V.N.S. Murthy, Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Vol. I, Saikripa Technical Consultants, Bangalore, 1991. ;;
CE 304;Surface and subsurface investigations. Boring and sampling. Field tests, introduction to airphoto interpretation. Theories of earth pressure and retaining walls. excavation, bracing, stability of slopes. Earth and rock fill dams. Bearing capacity of soils. Design and construction of shallow footings, rafts, pile foundations, caisson and coffer dams, anchored bulkheads.;CE 303;R.F. Craig, Soil Mechanics, ELBS & Van Nestrand, 4th Edition, 1987. 
R.B. Peck, W.E. Hanson and T.H. Thornburn, Foundation Engineering, John Wiley, 1963. 
V.N.S. Murthy, Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Vol. II, Saikripa Technical Consultants, Bangalore, 1991;;
CE 305;) Statically indeterminate trusses, beams, frames and arches. Analysis by the method of displacements. Introduction to solution of simultaneous equations. Moment distribution and Kani"s methods. Muller-Breslau principle and Influence lines for statically indeterminate structures. Introduction to plastic analysis.;CE 202;J.S. Kinney, Indeterminate Structural Analysis, Oxford Book Co., 1976. 
H.H. West, : Analysis of Structures", John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1980. 
C.H. Norris, J.B. Wiblur and S. Utku, Elementary Structural Analysis, Third Edition, McGraw Hill, International Student Edition, Tokyo, 1976. 
;;
CE 306;Matrix algebra with special reference to inversion. Matrix formulation of force and displacement methods. Computer oriented stiffness matrix approach. Solution of plane and space framed structures. Finite element method for plane problems.;CE 305,CE 306;W.M. Jenkins, Matrix and Digital Computer Methods in Structural Analysis, McGraw Hill, 1969. 
W. Weaver and J.M. Gere - Matrix Analysis of Framed Structures, Third Edition, Von Nastrand, N.Y. 1990. 
H.C. Martin, Introduction to Matrix Methods of Structural Analysis, Int. Students Ed., McGraw-Hilll, 1966. 
S.S. Tezcan, Computer Analysis of Plane and Space Structures, Jr. Struct. Div. Proc. ASCE, Vol. 92, p. 143, 1966. 
H.H. West, Fundamental of Structural Analysis, John Wiley & Sons, 1993. 
;;
CE 307;Design basis of reinforced concrete structures-slab design; simply supported, continuous and two way - Beam design; rectangular; tee, ell, doubly reinforced, continuous - column : Concentric, eccentric, short and long columns - Footing: simple, combined - staircases - joint detailing.;;J. Krishna, and O.P . Jain, Plain and Reinforcement Concrete - Vol. I & II, Nemchand Bros, Roorkee, 19 
IS-456-1983 Code of Practice for Plain and Reinforced Concrete. 
P. Dayaratnam, : Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures, Third Edition, Oxford-IBM Publications, New Delhi 1989. 
S.N. Sinha : Reinforced Concrete Design, Tata McGraw Hill New Delhi, 1990. 
;;
CE 308;Basis of designing steel structures- Rivetted, bottled and welded connections - tension and compression members - built up members - beam design - builtup beams - laced and battened columns - welded and riveted column bases - moment resistant connections - semi rigid connections - design of supports.;;A.S. Arya and J.L. Ajmani, Design of steel structures; Nemchand Bros, Roorkee, 1990. 
S.M.A. Kazimi and R.S. Jindal, : Design of Steel Structures Prentice Hall (India), New Delhi, 1981. 
S.K. Duggal, : `Design of Steel Structures, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1993. 
;;
CE 309;Water treatment : 
For treatment and objectives screen and disposal of screenings, principles of settling and types of settling tanks, mechanical mixing and devices. Coagulation, Flocculation Clarification and sludge removal, Coagulants and aids, theory of filtration Rapid Sand and Slow Sand filters, Microstrainers, Diatomite and Pressure filters, Operation and design of filters. Disinfection. Chlorination and other disinfecting methods. Miscellaneous water treatment such as aeration, adsorption Iron and Manganese-removal, Water Softening methods. 
Wastewater Treatment Methods : 
Primary treatment, screens grit removal, Grease and oil removal, sedimentation inhoff tanks. Secondary treatment, Activated sludge, Trickling filters, sludge digestion, drying and disposal. Wastewater Treatment in unsewered areas. Design of treatment units. 
;;G. Tehobanoglous (Ed) : Metcalf and Eddef Inc., "Wastewater Engineering ; Treatment Disposal and Reuse", Tata McGraw Hill co., Ltd., New Delhi - 110 002, 1992. 
Terence J. McGhee, Water Supply and Sewerage, McGraw Hill Book Co., 1991. 
M.J. Hanmer : Water and Wastewater Technology John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1986. 
G. Tchobonoglous & E.D Shroeder : Water Quality, Addison Wesley Publishing Co. Reading Massachusetts, 1985. 
C.P.H.E.E.O : Manual on Sewerage and Sewage Treatment, Ministry of Works and Housing, New Delhi 1980. 
;;
CE 310;Various fields of Transportation, Objectives of Transportation Systems Engineering, Role of Transportation in Society - economical, social, political and environmental, Terminals - passenger and freight, Transportation costs - supply and demand, Different modes of travel and their co-ordination with respect to Indian conditions, vehicles motion - resistances, vehicle performance relationship, work-energy and fuel consumption. Introduction to Transportation Planning Process, Planning models & mass Transit Systems.
Principles of Highway Planning, Road Development and Planning in India. Highway Location and alignment, Geometric Design (IRC Specifications) Design speed, camber, S.E. design, horizontal & vertical curve design, sight distances, gradient etc. Traffic Engineering - traffic characteristics, traffic studies and their use, traffic control devices, inter-sections, goods and passenger terminals. Pavement Design - Failure concept (structural and functional), Flexible, Rigid and Semi rigid pavements, comparison of highway and airport pavements, design of flexible pavements - ESWL, EWLF, Layered theories, effect of repetitions, CBR-method, Asphalt Institute method, AASHO method, Design of Rigid pavements - temperature stresses, joints, dowel and tie bars, overlays, construction of roads, stabilized roads, maintenance and drainage.

;;E.R. Morlok, An Introduction to Transportation Engg., & Planning, McGraw Hill Kagakusha International Student Edition, 1970. 
S.K. Khanna, & C.E.G. Justo, Highway Engineering, Nemchand, Roorkee, 1992. 
W.W. Hay, Introduction to Transportation Engineering, John Willy, New York, 2nd Edition, 1988. 
B.G. Hutchinson, Principles of Urban Transportation Planning McGraw Hill Book Company, 1974. 
;;
CE 311;Computation of surface profiles in gradually varied flow, location of hydraulic jump and flood routing. Channel Design and Transitions - Energy Dissipators, spillways.;;V.T. Chow, "Open Channel Hydraulics, McGraw Hill, 1975. 
K.G. Rangaraju, "Flow in Open Channels Tata McGraw Hill Publication Co. Ltd., New Delhi, 1993. 
K. Subramanya, "Flow in Open Channels Tata McGraw Hill Publication Co. Ltd., New Delhi, 1992. 
R.H. French, "Open Channel Hydraulics McGraw Hill Book Co., New York 1986. 
;;
CE 312;Based on CE 302. ;;;;
CE 313;Identification of soils. Determination of physical properties. Consistency limits. Determination of soil permeability and compaction characteristics of soils.;;J.E. Bowles, Physical and Geotechnical Properties of Soils, 2nd edition, McGraw Hill International Editions, 1990. 
T.W. Lambe, Soil Testing for Engineers, Wiley, 1960. 
;;
CE 314;Consolidation, shear strength of soils, direct shear test. Triaxial test. UCC test and CBR test, graphical exercises on earth pressure, stability of slopes etc.;;J.E. Bowles, Physical and Geotechnical Properties of Soils, 2nd edition, McGraw Hill International Editions, 1990. 
T.W. Labme, Soil Testing for Engineers, Wiley, 1960. 
;;
CE 315;Design and drawing of continuous or two way slabs; continuous beam; column with a footing; joint details beam-slab; beam-column and column-footing.;;Same as that for CE 307.;;
CE 318;Design and drawing of built-up compression members; plate girder design, design and drawing of laced/buttened columns with base plate ; moment resistant designs.;;Same as that for CE 308.;;
CE 401;Rainfall and runoff, hydrograph analysis, peaks flows. Reservoir planning and operation, run-of the river schemes, storage schemes. Dams and spillways, intakes, water-conductory systems, tunnels, surge-tanks, penstocks and anchor blocks. Hydro-electric power classification and investigations. Turbines, power house, irrigation, crop requirements and yields, water planning. Weirs on permeable foundations. Canals layout, stable channels, and silt control, canal losses and water-logging.;CE 301;R.K. Linsley and J.L.H. Paulhus : Water Resources Engineering, Mcgraw Hill Book Co., 1992. 
W.P. Creager and J.D. Justin : Hydroelectric Handbook John Wiley, 1968. 
Bharat Singh : Fundamentals of Irrigation Engineering Nemchand Bros., Roorkee, 1957. 
P.N. Modi, Irrigation Water Resources and Water Power Engineering Standard Book House, NEw Delhi, 1990. 
;;
CE 403;Design of RCC watertanks, silos, bunkers and simple bridges - Design of steel roof trusses, steel frames - Design of industrial buildings - Design of residential buildings - Design of arches and shells.
;;
J. Krishna and O.P. Jain, Plain and Reinforced Concrete, Vol. I and II Nemchand Bros. Roorkee, 1968. 
IS 456, 1978. Code of Practice for Plain and Reinforced concrete. 
Design Aids for R.C. to IS 456-1978, ISI-SP-16-sand-T, 1980. 
A.S. Arya and J.L. Ajmani : Design of Steel Structures, Nemchand Bros. Roorkee, 1990. 
A.S. Arya and J.L. Ajmani : Design of Steel Structures, Nemchand Bros. Roorkee, 1990. 
S.M.A. Kazimi and R.S. Jindal - `Design of Steel Structures, Prentice Hall (India), New Delhi, 1981. 
S.K. Duggal - `Design of Steel Structures, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1993. 
P. Dayaratnam - `Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures, Third Edition, Oxford - IBM Publishing Co., New Delhi, 1989. 
S.N. Sinha - `Reinforced Concrete Design, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1990. 
;;
CE 407;Explorations, sampling geophysical investigations. Bearing capacity, settlement. Design of footings and rafts. Foundations subjected to eccentric loads and moments. Footings on slopes. Contact pressure distributions. Subgrade modulus. Earth pressure theories. Pile Foundations, driving stresses, load tests, pile groups, pile caps, lateral loads. Bridge foundations caissons, coffer dams. Excavation; and dewatering for foundations. Failures and strengthening. Foundations on weak soils, reclaimed areas, swelling soils etc. Machine foundations.;;R.B. Peck, W.E. Hanson and T.H. Thornburn, Foundation Engineering, John Wiley, 1963. 
Gopal Ranjan and A.S.R. Rao, Basic and Applied Soil Mechanics, Wiley Eastern, 1991. 
V.N.S. Murthy, Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Vol. II, Saikripa Technical Consultants, Bangalore, 1991. 
M.R. Hausmann, Engineering Principles of Ground Modification, McGraw Hill International Edition, 1990. ;;
CE 410;Linear theory of waves, brief description of higher order wave theories random waves, probability theories. Morison"s equation, wave forces on fixed and floating structures and fluid-structure interaction. Soil exploration beneath sea bed, criteria of foundation design in offshore environment, pile behaviour under cyclic lateral loading, development of p-y curves. Analysis of piles and foundations of gravity platforms, soil liquification under cyclic stresses. Various types of offshore structures and evaluation of their environmental loads. Structural idealization and analysis of forces due-to-wind, waves and for linear static behaviour. Wave force on inclined members, analysis of joints in offshore structures, stress concentration and fatigue life prediction. Elementary aspects of dynamic analysis and response.;;T. Sarapkaya and M. Isaacson, Mechanics of Wave Forces on Offshore Structures, Van Nostrand, Reinhold Co., N.Y., 1981. 
C.A. Brebbla and S. Walker, Dynamic Analysis of Offshore Structures, Newnes Butterworth, London, 1979. 
Proceedings of OTC and BOSS. 
;;
CE 413;Airport planning, aircraft characteristics affecting airport design. Airport layout, runway and taxiway design, overlays, terminals, runway marking and lighting, drainage, heliports, vertical take off systems. Indian Railways, track components, track geometry, points and crossings, signaling and Inter-locking, yards and stations, track construction and maintenance, traffic operations. Laboratory testing of subgrade soils, aggregates, Bituminous binders and mixes for their suitability as road materials, with reference to Indian Standards. Traffic studies in field. Demonstration of Pavement Evaluation Tests.

;CE 310R;R. Horonjeff and F.X. Mckelvey, Planning and Designing of Airport, McGraw Hill International Editions, 3rd Edition, 1990. 
S.K. Khanna and M.G. Arora, Airport Planning and Design, Nemchand Bros., Roorkee, 1991. 
S.C. Saxena and S.P. Arora, A Text book of Railway Engineering Dhanpat Rai & Son, 6th edition, 1990. 
M.M. Agarwal, Indian Railway Track, Sachdeva Press, Mayapuri, New Delhi, 1991. 
S.K. Khanna and DC.E.G. Justo, Highway Engineering Laboratory Manual, Nemchand Bros., Roorkee, 1991. 
S.L. Dhingra, and G.V. Rao., Transportation Engg., Laboratory Manual, C.D. Cell, Civil Engg. Deptt., IIT Delhi. 
;;
CE 422;Detailed stress analysis of gravity dam, stress concentration around openings. Principles of design of outlets and galleries. Design of penstocks and anchor blocks. Detailed design of highhead and spillway gates. Analysis and design of surge chambers. Design of locks and jetties. Design of beams of elastic foundations as applied to dock floors.;;W.P. Creager, J.D. Justin and J. Hinds, Engineering for Dams, Vol. II and III Wiley, 1968. 
A.D. Quinn, Design and Construction of Ports and Marine Structures, McGraw Hill, 1973. 
C.V. Davis, Handbook of Applied Hydraulics McGraw Hill, New York, 1993. 
U.S. Deptt. of Interior, Design of Small Dams, U.S. Govt. Printing Press, Washington DC 1975. 
;;
CE 424;Occurence of groundwater aquifer types. Exploration of groundwater Groundwater budget. Resistivity methods. Darcy"s law and its limitations. Formulation of governing equations for groundwater movement. Flow nets and its uses. Hydraulics of flow towards wells. Aquifer unsteady flow. Theis, Jacob and Chow"s methods multiple well system. Artificial recharge. Infiltration. Mechanics of recharge, stream aquifer interaction. Water logging. Theory of subsurface drainage. Seawater intrusion and its control. Approximate solution Digital, Analog and Simple finite difference models for groundwater flow. Groundwater quality, Groundwater development and management.;;H.M. Raghunath, Groundwater, 2nd Edition Wiley Eastern Ltd., 1987. 
D.K. Todd, Groundwater Hydrology, John Wiley and Sons, 1980. 
D.B. McWhorter, D.K. Sundada, Ground-Water Hydrology and Hydraulics, Water Resources Publications, P.O. Box 303, Fort Collins Colorado, U.S.A. 1977. 
C.W. Fetter, Applied Hydrogeology 2nd Edition, CBS Publishers and Distributors, New Delhi 110 032, 1990. 
;;
CE 430;Need for a port, factors affecting the growth of ports, requirements of ports. Planning, some case studies of existing harbours in India and abroad. Design wave, wave diffraction, refraction and reflection, littoral drift, coastal and harbour protection works, groynes, break-waters, design of berthing structures, jetties; wharves, dry and wet docks, model studies of harbours.;CE 301;A.D. Quinn : Design and Construction of Ports and Marine Structures, McGraw Hill, 1972. 
H.F. Corwick, Dock and Harbour Engineering, Vol. I to IV, Charles Griffin and Co., Ltd., London, 1959. 
Per Brunn, Port Engineering, Gulf Publishing Co., Houstow Texas,1989. 
Shore Protection Manual, Vol. I, II, III, U.S. Army Coastal Engg. Research Centre, U.S. Govt. Printing Press, Washington, D.C. 
;;
CE 442;Principles of SHM, forced and damped vibrations in soil media. Tests for evaluation of dynamic coefficients. Design of simple foundations for turbogenerators, reciprocating engines of horizontal and vertical type, forge hammer etc. Machine foundation on sands and clays.;;D.D. Barkan, Dynamics of Bases and Foundations, McGraw-Hill, 1962. 
W.T. Thompson, Mechanical Vibrations, George Allen Unwin Ltd. 
S.P. Timoshenko et. al. Vibration Problems in Engineering, John Wiley. ;;
CE 448;Prestressing concepts, materials, systems of prestressing and losses. Introduction to working stress method, limit state analysis and design of members for bending. Shear torsion and axial forces. End block design. Deflections, use of relevant codes of practice.;;T.Y. Lin, Design of Prestressed Concrete Structures, Asia Publishing House, 1955. 
N. Krishnaraju, Prestressed Concrete, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1981. 
Y. Guyan, Limited State Design of Prestressed Concrete, Applied Science Publishers, 1972. 
;;
CE 461;Systems; Concepts, parameters, Objectives, Classification and models. Identification of Civil Engineering Systems and their mathematical representation. Operations Research Methods : Objectives, Design variables. Formulation of objective functions. Classical methods of optimization Economic consideration. Linear and nonlinear programming. Unconstrained optimization elements of Dynamic programming and Queuing theory Probability Model Simulation. Application to Civil Engineering problems.;;Ossenbruggen Paul J : System Analysis for Civil Engineers, John Wiley Ltd., 1984. 
Rao,S.S. : Optimization, Theory and Applications, Wiely Eastern Ltd., 1979. 
Stark R.M. & Nicholls R.L. : Mathematical Foundations for Design : Civil Engineering Systems, 1972. 
Templeton Andrew B : Civil Engineering Systems, MaCmillan Press Ltd., 1982. 
;;
CE 462;SDOF System - Equation of Motion; Generalized SDOF system; Free Vibration; Harmonic Load; Periodic Load; Impulse Load; General Loads (Time and Frequency Domain Analysis); Introduction to Nonlinear Analysis; Seismic Analysis. MDOF System - Systems - Property matrices; Undamped Free Vibration; Mode Superposition Techniques ; Practical Free-Vibration Analysis; Buildings; Seismic Analysis; Code Provision.;;R.W. Clough, J. Penzlen, Dynamics of Structures, McGraw Hill, 2nd ed. 1993 
M. Paz, Structural Dynamics - Theory and Computation, Van Nostrand, 1985 
IS : 1893-1984 Criteria for Earthquake-Resistant Design of Structures. 
;;
CE 463;Role of probability in Civil Engineering ; Random events, Random variables; functions of random variables; moments and expectations; Common probabilistic models - normal, log normal, poisson, extremal ; estimation of parameters; goodness of fit tests ; regression and correlation analyses, principles of Baysean Decision Theory ; Introduction to structural reliability; elements of quality assurance and acceptance sampling.;;H.S. Ang and W.H. Tang, Probability Concepts in Engineering Planning and Design, John Wiley, 1975. 
J.R. Benjamin and C.A. Cornell, "Probability Statistics and Decision for Civil Engineers, McGraw Hill, 1975. ;;
CE 465;Computer applications in Civil Engineering, typical problem categories, techniques for linear problems, techniques for nonlinear problems. Algorithms in time domain using Runge-Kutta methods. Newmark B-method and finite-difference approaches : Concept of stability of algorithm, propagation of errors in different algorithms. Use of commercial software for Civil Engineering Problems.;;A. Jennujs, Matrix computations for Engineers and Scientists, John Wily & Sons (1977). 
S.D. Conte & C-de Boor, Elementary Numerical Analysis : An Algorithmic Approach, 3rd ed., McGraw Hill (1980). ;;
CE 469;Introduction to elasticity theory ; Simple 2D/3D problems and their solutions ; Pure bending of beams with unsymmetrical section; Shear Centre ; Thermal stresses ; Torsion of noncircular members ; Curved Beams ; Beams on elastic foundation ; Plasticity ; Failure theories ; Energy methods ; Thermal stresses ; Introduction to viscoelasticity and viscoplasticity ; Numerical methods ; Coupled axial force and bending moment problems ; Coupled torsion and bending moment problems.;CE 102, CE 201;A.P. Boresi and O.M. Sidebottom, Advanced Mechanics of Materials, Fifth Edition, Wiley, Singapore, 1992. 
S.P. Timoshenko-Strength of Materials - Vol. 2, - Third Edition - CBS Publishers Delhi, 1991. 
;;
CE 470;Principles of surveying methods, compass and theodolite traverse; plane table methods; levelling and contouring, tacheometry, triangulation, astronomical observation of true N-S and latitude; elements of mine surveying. ;;G.L. Hosmer, Geodesy, wiley 
D. Clark, Plane and Geodetic Surveying, Vol. I and II Constable. 
B.G. Bomford, Geodesy. 
G.L. Hosmer, Practical Astronomy, Wiley, 1958. 
;;
CE 472;Development Development objectives and goals. Five year plans, levels of planning (urban and regional), regional planning and development theories and techniques, types and delineation of regions. Human settlement patterns. Role of transport in national development. Social, economic and political functions. Transport system and its subsystems. Transport modes and technologies. Family of modes; vehicles, travelways, stops, stations and garages, operational performance, cost, energy, present and future roles. Road transport, rail transport air transport, water transport new and future modes. Transport economics, theories, techniques, costs and benefits. Transport systems planning. Travel demand forecasting methods and models. Intermodel mix network optimization theories and techniques. Decision making. Transport and energy type and quantity of energy, efficiency, consraints, transport and environment transport management (policy, organisation, legal provisions), integration and coordination information systems, data base.;;Prakash Rao and Sundaram, Regional Development Planning in India, Vikas Publishing House, 1974. 
B.G. Hutchinson, Introduction to Urban Transportation Systems Planning, McGraw-Hill, 1974. 
Vukan R. Vuchic, Urban Public Transportation Systems and Technology, Prentice Hall Inc., N.J., 1981. 
G.E. Gray and L.A. Hoel, Public Transportation Planning Operations and Management, Prentice Hall Inc., N.J.,1979. ;;
CE 474;Preparation of detailed estimates for various items of construction including schedules of reinforcements, preparation of data sheets and abstract estimates for building and other civil engineering works, approximate estimates, principles of valuation of buildings. Preparation of descriptive specification sheets for typical construction items. Introduction to construction programming, bar-chart and network analysis.;;B.N. Dutta, Estimating and Costing; Theory and Practice in Civil Engineering, S. Dutta and Co., Lucknow, 1991;;
CE 476;Stress at a point; stress tensor; Deviatoric Stress tensor; Invariants; equations of equilibrium in cartesan. Polar, cylindrical and spherical coordinates; surface conditions; Strain at a point, strain tensor, strain Deviator. Invariants, Large strains, compatibility equations. Generalised Hooke"s low for Anisotropic, orthotropic and isotropic materials, Lame"s constants. Basic equations of elasticity; solution in terms of displacements - Lame"s Equations; Solution in terms of Stresses - Beltrani-Mitchell Equations. Solution of some 2-D and 3-D problems, stress functions, Torsion of thin walled sections, bending of plates, variational methods of theory of elasticity.;;M. Filonenoko-Borodich, "Theory of Elasticity", Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow. 
I.S. Sokolnikoff, "Mathematical Theory of Elasticity", McGraw-Hill, Second Ed. 
I.E.H. Love, "A Trealise on mathematical theory of elasticity", Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
U.G. Rekach, "Manual of the theory of elasticity", Mir Publishers, Moscow. 
S.P. Timoshenko and J.N. Goodier, "Theory of Elasticity", McGraw-Hill. 
;;
MM 401;General concepts of automatic control. Feed forward, feed back and Cascade control. Block diagram representation. P,I and D control actions. Static and dynamic behaviour of systems. Static and dynamic behaviour of control systems, Stability concepts. Frequency response analysis. Analog computer applications. General concepts of Instrument classifications and functions. Methods of measurements and measuring systems for temperature, pressure, vacuum, flow, level and motion. Process instrumentation. Case examples from metallurgical processes. ;;Koughnour and Koppel : Process Control Engineering, PMI Publishers, 1986. 
I.J.Nagarath, M.Gopal : Control Systems Engineering, Wiley Eastern, 1981. 
D.P.Eckmen, Industrial Instrumentation, Wiley Eastern, 1975. 
;;
MM 402;Work study, plant location and layout, systems economics, material management, maintenance management quality management, scheduling linear programming and its applications, decision analysis, queing models, safety in industry. ;;A. Ravindran, D. T. Phillips and J. J. Solberg, Operations research- Principles and Practice (2nd Ed.), John Wiley, 1987. 
J. L. Riggs, Production Planning and Control (4th Ed.) John Wiley 1987. 
;;
MM 403;Reversible cells and Electrode potentials. Polarization : causes and measurement, depolarization, mixed potential theory. Evan s corrosion diagram. Construction of Pourbaix diagram. Different forms of corrosion including microscopic and macroscropic forms, preventive measures. Experimental techniques for corrosion rate measurements including electrochemical measurements and accelerated corrosion tests. High temperature corrosion : mechanism, governing laws, selective oxidation. Methods of corrosion protection : cathodic and anodic protection, protective coatings. ;;Fontana and Greene : Corrosion Engineering, Tata Mc-Graw Hill, 1985 
H.H.Uhlig : Corrosion and Corrosion Control, Wiley-Interscience,1985 
;;
MM 404;Classification of polymers. Polymerization reactions. Polymer characterization, Thermal, Mechanical and electrical properties, Polymer Crystallinity, Structure Property correlations in polymers. Hybrid polymers; Polymer Degradation and Stabilization. 
Polymer Engineering: Raw materials for production, Industrial Polymer production, Polymer processing techniques; Fabrication of special polymer products; polymer matrix composites; Recycling of Plastics. 

;;C.M.Hall : Polymer Materials, 2nd edition, MacMillan Education Ltd., London 1989. 
W.R.Williams, Polymer Engineering, New York, Elsevier, 1975. 
R.B.Seymour and C.E.Carraher Jr., Polymer Chemistry, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1992. 
Polymer Engineering Principles, R.C. Progelhof, Throne, Hanser Publ. Munich, 1993. 
Modern Plastics Encyclopedia Issue, Modern Plastics, Published yearly. 
;;
MM 405;Development of microstructures, microstructural characterization, importance of quantitative metallography and other modern characterization techniques. Review of strengthening mechanisms. 
Principles of designing for strength, toughness, wear machinability, fatigue, creep, corrosion resistance and special surface treatments, hardenability and weldability. 

Selection of steels, non-ferous alloys, ceramics and composites for various applications. 

;;R.Jaffee and B.Wilcox, Fundamental Aspects of Structural Alloy Design, Plenum Press, 1977. 
B.Pickering, Physical Metallurgy and the Design of Steels, Applied Science Publishers, 1983. 
R.F.Kern and M.E.Suess, Steel Selection, Wiley Interscience, 1979. 
F.A.A Crane and J.A.Charles, Selection and Use of Engineering Materials, Butterworths, 1984. 
Metals Handbook, 9th Edition, Vol.1 (1978), Vol.2 (1979), ASM. 
;;
MM 411;Experiments based on heat transfer in furnaces, packed bed, fluidized bed. Heat transfer during boiling and quenching. Study of flow characteristics in furnace chambers, burners and jets. 
Group assignments on design of equipment of practical applications in metallurgical industry. 

;;Laboratory Manual : Met. Equipment Design, Lab., IIT Bombay. ;;
MM 412;Experiments based on the theory courses MT 401 and Lab. projects. 
;;;;
MM 413;Casting properties of metals : Fluidity, shrinkage, contraction, gas absorption tendency, hot tears, segregation. 
Sand testing : Green compression strength, Permeability, shatter index, Baked tensile strength, Mould and Core hardness, Moisture determination. Casting defects : Visual inspection of typical casting defects. Cast structures : Study of typical grain structures and microstructures of cast alloys including directionally solidified alloys. Centrifugal casting. Electroslag casting, Continuous casting, gases in metals, study of inclusions in cast metals. 

;; 
Laboratory Manual : Dept. of Met. Engg., IIT Bombay. 

;;
MM 415;Experiments based on basic principles underlying various metallurgical equipments, process and products. These include: Study of jets, inspiration burners, aerodynamics of furnaces, fluidized and packed bed furnaces, Evaluation of quenching media and boiling heat transfer. 
Design project related to design of products like die castings, dies for casting and metal forming, sheet metal forming, design for heat treatment, forgings, castings, centrifugal castings, P/M parts, induction hardening, flame hardening, case-carburising etc. designing for hardenability. 

Computer applications in process and product Design. 

;;Laboratory Manual and Data Book, Met. Engg. Dept. IIT Bombay. 
G.E.Dietv, Engineering Design for Materials Processing and Fabrication, 2nd Ed., Mc-Graw Hill, 1986. 
G.H.Geiger and D.R.Poiriev, Transport Phenomena in Metallurgy, Addision Wesley, 1973. 
Metals Handbooks, American Society for Metals, 9th Ed. 
;;
MM 421;Melting of cast irons, aluminium, copper, magnesium zinc and their alloys. Specifications of common foundry alloys. Moulding methods and materials, sand-clay-water systems. Additives in the moulding sands. Casting defects related to mould and core materials. 

Permanent mould casting processes. Principles of die design, gravity and pressure die casting. Fettling of castings. 

;MM 321;R.W.Hein, C.R.Loper and P.C.Rosenthal, Principles of Metal Casting, McGraw Hill, 1976. 
W.B.Parkes, Clay Bonded Foundry Sands, Allied Science Publishers, 1971. 
P.R.Beeley, Foundry Technology, Butterworths, 1972. 
P.C.Mukherjee, Fundamentals of Metal Casting Technology, Oxford and IBH, 1980. 
P.D.Webster, Fundamentals of Foundry Technology, Portcullis Press, 1980. 
;;
CE 691;Grain size analysis of marine samples, consolidation and settlement tests, shear strength tests under static and dynamic loading and varying strain rates and drainage, preparation of models of offshore analysis. ;;;;
CE 689;Stability of floating bodies hydrostatic stability at small angles, metacentre diagram, stability at large angels, dynamic stability, flooding and sub-division, damaged stability, heeling due to tide and wind. 
Dynamics of floating bodies-dynamics of freely floating bodies and structures, wave motion, wave forces on moorings, motion of moored structures in deterministic and random waves, operational requirements and design effects. 

Submarine pipelines, laying process, stress developed during laying, trenching, anchoring and other methods of placement forces on submerged pipelines and other structures. 

;;Bhattacharya R, Dynamics of Marine Vehicles, John Wiley, 1978. 
Mousselli A.H., Offshore pipeline design, analysis and methods, Penwel Pub. Co., Oklahama, 1981. 
J. N. Lagerald, Design Criteria for Single Point Mooring Terminal, ASCE, Vol. 100, WW4, 1974. 
;;
CE 692;Materials and their behaviour under static and dynamic loads, allowable stresses, various design methods and codes, design consideration, design loads, design of decking of template type steel structures, design of supporting legs, design of braces. 
Corrosion and other allowances, consideration of stress concentration, design of concrete platforms, ingradient materials and protective measure, design of raft foundation, design of side walls, design of decking, design of composite structures. 
;;Defnorske Veritas, Rules for the design, construction and inspection of fixed offshore structures, 1977. 
Energy Department, U.K., Guidance of Design and Construction of Offshore Installation, 1974. 
American Petroleum Institute, API RP-2A, Recommended Practice for Planning, Designing and Constructing Fixed Offshore Platforms, 1974. 
Offshore Technology Conference Volumes, O.C.Zienkiewicz, R., Wlewis and K.G. Stagg, Numerical Methods in Offshore Engineering, Wiley Interscience Publication, 1978. 
;;
CE 693;Sinusoidal waves; transformations of waves with boundary conditions of depth and width relations between different wave characteristics. 
Study of reflections (standing waves) refraction and diffraction patterns, shock pressures due to breaking wave forces on cylinders (single and groups of cylinders) submerged objects. 

Wind generated waves - introduction to spectral measurements. 

;;Ippen A.T., Coastal Hydrodynamics, McGraw-Hill. 1965. 
U.S. Army Core of Engineers, Shore Protection Manual, 1984. 
;;
CE 694;Principles of development of special and general purpose packages like SAPIV, STRUDL, OSADP and other packages, techniques of data generation, input-output manuals, flow charting and illustrative examples, uses of graphic techniques, incorporation of various codal providions and error messages, various techniques of static, eigenvalue and numerical integration techniques for incore and out of core solutions. 
Spectral load matrices, transfer functions, linearisation techniques, extreme response calculations. 

Fluid loading on numbers of offshore structures, programme subroutines for computation of forces by different wave theories and codal provisions, foundation response, evaluation of piles under axial and lateral loading, evaluation of behaviour of rafts and raft support stiffnesses for immediate and long term loading, program routines for above, interactive analysis, checks on various requirements for strength and deformation and redesigns. 

;;Offshore Technology Conference Volumes, Proceedings of Annual Offshore Technology, Conferences, Houston, Texas, 1969-1979. 
;;
CE 696;Non-stationary processes, level crossing problem, single degree system PSDF of response, CSD of excitation and response, multidegree freedom system, cross-correlation and space time correlation of distributed randon loading, introduction to nonlinear random vibrations, general spectral analysis of multidegree system, empirical wave spectra and wind spectra, wave theories and water particle velocity and acceleration spectra. 
Fluid structure interaction problem, random forces on platforms (wind, wave, earthquake), development of governing-differential equation, Markov vector approach, perturbation, method of linearization techniques solution in frequency domain, nonstationary response, response of platforms to random waves, gusty winds, and earthquake motions, soil structures interaction, extreme value statistics for response, statistical energy, analysis, time average model, kinetic energies, response of a set of modes, probabilistic fatigue analysis and introduction to realiability analysis of offshore structural system. 

;;B.J. Muga and I.F. Wilson, Dynamic Analysis of Ocean Structures, Plenum Press, New York, 1976. 
Offshore Technology Conference Volumes, MIT Summer Course on Coastal Hydrodynamics, Vol. I and II, 1976. 
Conferece on Behaviour of Offshore Structures, International Research Seminar on Safety of Structures. 
J. S. Bendat, A.G. Piersol, Random Data Analysis and Measurement Procedures, Wiley Interscience, 1971. 
Y.K. Lin, Probabilistic Theory of Structural Dynamics, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1967. 
;;
CE 701;Electro-magnetic energy : Laws, distribution and interactions; Photography, photogrammetry, photo-interpretation elements, methods and applications. 
Non-photographic sensors : Radiometers, multi-spectral and thermal infrared scanners; Microwave radar imaging; Visual interpretation and digital analysis of images, methods and applications. 

;;F. F. Sabins (Jr.), Remote Sensing : Principals and Interpretation, Freeman & Co., San Francisco, 1978. 
T.M. Lillesand and R.W. Kiefer, Remote Sensing and Image Interpretation, John Wiley and Sons, 1979. 
R. N. Colwel (Ed.), Manual of Remote Sensing, Vol.I & II, American Society of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, Falls Church, Va. (1983). 
;;
CE 705;Geometry of aerial photographs, stereoscopic measurements, parallax formulae, radial line triangulation, theory of relative, absolute and numerical orientation, model deformation, plotting instruments, aerial triangulation, base map, thematic map compilation, analytical photogrammetry, terrestrial photogrammetry, applications to measurements in civil engineering. ;;Moffit, Francis, Photogrammetry, 2nd Edn., International Textbook Co. Scranton, 1967. 
Paul, R. Wolf, Elements of Photogrammetry, McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1974. 
R.N. Colwel (Ed.), Manual of Remote Sensing, Vol. I & II, American Society of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, Falls Church, Va. (1983). 
;;
CE 720;Types of materials, tests and the variables involved, destructive and non-destructive testing correlation of properties obtained by NDT with the basic structure of matter and other properties; NDT of different materials by various techniques such as radiographic, sonic and ultrasonic, electrical and magnetic, soleoroscopic, microwave, eddy current penetrant, thermal optical, holographic etc., practical applications and advances in NDT. ;;J.F. Hinslay, Non-Destructive Testing, MacDonald and Evants, 1959. 
H.B. Egerton, Non-Destructive Testing, Oxford University Press, 1969. 
Krautkramer: Ultrasonic Testing of Materials, Springer-Verlag, 1969. 
M.A. Novgoresky, Testing of Building Materials and Structures, Mir Publishers, 1973. 
American Society of Metals : Handbook, Vol II, Destructive Inspection and Quality Control, 1976. 
;;
MM 430;The importance of model building and process analysis. Types of models Phenomenological models. Steps in model building. Examples from mineral processing, extraction metallurgy, physical metallurgy and mechanical working. Optimisation, Some simple mathematical methods for process modelling. ;;D.M.Himmelblau and K.B.Bischof, Process Analysis and Simulation, Wiley, 1968. 
W.H.Press, et.al., Numerical Recipes, The Art of Scientific Computing, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1988. 
J.Szekely, J.W.Evans and J.K.Brimacombe, The Mathematical and Physical Modelling of Primary Metals Processing Operations, John Wiley, 1988. 
;;
CE 731; Equations of motion and continuity, integral equations of momentum and energy and control volume approach, laminar flow in pipes and channel, elements of boundary layer concepts, boundary shear stress-skin drag, turbulent flow in pipes and channels, velocity distribution, (manifolds, diffusion of jets, out-falls and dispersion in open channels), steady but nonuniform flow profiles in channels, channel design, form drag losses in pipe and channel transitions-design of siphon and channel transitions, unsteady flow in open channels, surges in channels linked with hydraulics of gates and their operation. ;;H. Rouse, Engineering Hydraulics, J. Wiley and Sons, 1950. 
F.M.Hendersen, Open Channel Flow, MacMillan Co., 1966. 
Daily & Harleman, Fluid Dynamics, Addison Wesley, 1973. 
;;
CE 740;Introduction, Basic for traffic engineering; Planning and design of facilities; Travel forecasting principles and techniques; Design Hourly volumes and speed; Highway capacity and performance characteristics; Parking, simulation in Traffic engineering design. ;;G.J. Pingnataro, Principles of Traffic Engineering, Mc Graw-Hill, 1970. 
Wohl and Martin, Traffic System Analysis for Engineering and Planners, Mc Graw Hill, 1983. 
Ronald D. Drew, Traffic Flow Theory, Mc Graw Hill, 1964. 
;;
CE 742;Materials for road construction; Specifications and tests; Macadam construction, surfacing and surface treatment; Asphal mix design pavement structure; Stresses in flexible and rigid pavements; Subgrade evaluation; Design of flexible, semi- flexible and rigid pavements; Temperature stresses and joints. ;;Yoder and Witzech, Pavement Design, McGraw-Hill, 1982. 
Sharma and Sharma, Principles and Practise of Highway Engg., Asia Publishing House, 1980. 
Teng, Functional Designing of Pavements, Mc Graw - Hill, 1980. 
;;
CE 746;Basic introduction to the elements of Ground Engineering characteristics of reinforcing materials, definition of reinforced and advantage of RE, soil reinforcement interaction, behaviour of Reinforced earth walls, basis of wall design, the Coulomb force method, the Rankine force methods, internal and external stability condition, field application of RE, randomly reinforced earth and analysis of reinforced soils, testing of soil reinforcements. 
Definitions, functions, properties, and application of Geotextiles, design of Geotextile applications, definitions, functions, properties and applications of geomembranes, design of geomembranes applications, Geotextiles associated with geomembranes, testing on geotextiles, environmental efforts, ageing and weathering. 

;;International Conference on Soil Reinforcement, RE and other techniques, Paris, March, 1979. 
Second International Conference on Geotextiles, Las Vegas, August, 1982. 
International Conferences in-situ soil and rock reinforcement, Paris, October, 1984. 
;;
CE 751;Components of transportation, system and their interaction; Dimension of the widening role of urban transportation system planning process and use and evaluation of various models; Transportation impact study methodologies. 
Strategies for the evaluation of alternate transportation plans and plan implementation, framework and case studies. 

;;B.G. Hutchinson, Introduction to Urban Transport Systems, Planning, McGraw-Hill, 1970. 
;;
CE 753;Computer graphics applications and automated drafting; Digitization; Usage of plotter, etc. Functional and geometric design of traffic facilities; Plan and layout of major at-grade and grade-separated interactions; Parking lot and multi-storyed parking garages; Road network inventory. Design and coding of transportation planning surveys. GIS application in spatial data handling.;;;;
CE 752;Regional analysis and development concepts; The role of transportation planning in the overall regional system; Methodology and models for regional transportation system; Planning and implementation framework. 
Pollution : Cobart survival model inter regional cobart survival model, input output models, rural transport planning, freight transportation analysis case studies in regional and rural transportation planning. 

;;D. Salvo Perspectives in Regional Transportation Planning, Laxington Books, USA, 1974. 
Mishra Sundaram and Prakash Rao, Regional Development Planning in India, Vikas Publishing House Pvt. Ltd., 1974. 
Seminar, Road and Road Transport in Rural Areas, Nov. 19-21, 1985, CRRI, New Delhi. 
;;
CE 754;Economic analysis of transportation projects ownership and financing of transport, economic function of transportation, road user and transportation costs, highway finance and taxation, case studies of analysis and evaluation of transportation projects. ;;Fair and Williams, Economics of Transportation, Harperand Brothers, Publishers, New York, 1959. 
Winfrey, Robley, Economic Analysis for Highway International Textbook Co., Pennsylvania, USa, 1969. 
Harral Clell G., A Manual for the Economic Appraisal of Transport Projects, World Bank Report, Washington D.C., 1980. 
;;
CE 744;Introduction to transportation systems, transportation innovations, social and economic impacts of transportation; Decision makers and their options, demand modelling and predictions; Modelling transportation technologies; Analysis of network flows; Transportation network; Network theory, wardrops external principle of traffic assignments, evaluation of impacts; Basic physics of transportation; Concepts in transportation models and location models; Analysis of utility maximising systems such as transportation systems by entropy concepts; Major transportation technologies; Urban and megalopolitan transportation and economic policy, mathematical programming and other models for selecting network investments and operation planning; Case studies. ;;Manheim, Analysis of Transportation Systems, MIT, USA, 1980. 
R.G. Weilson, Entropy in Urban and Regional Transportation, McGraw-Hill, 1980. 
Miller and Mayor, Decision Analysis and Decision Making Oriented Urban Transportation, McGraw-Hill, 1984. 
Subramanyam, C. (con.), Lecture Notes for Short Courses on Techniques of Geomorphic Application, Dept. Earth Science, IIT, Bombay, 1983. 
Hails, J.R. Ed., Applied Geomorphology and Engineering, Downden, Hutchinson and Ross, Stroundsburg, 1976. 
Coats, D.R. Ed., Environmental Geomorphology and Landscape Conservation, Vols. II and III Dowen, Hutchinson and Ross, Stroudsburg, 1973. 
;;
CE 756;Ship characteristics aand their influence on ports management and operations. Civil engineers concern about ships and shipbuilding, syncrolift equipment in ports (General definition consideration and aspects in planning and design of ports and terminals) physical planning, location and orientation of major port components, access channels, basins, breakwaters, wharfs, quays piers, jetties, fendors, simulation modelling, analytical solutions, cargo handling systems, economic feasibility, evaluation, economic costs and benefits, least cost solutions, organization management and operation, function of port authorities, O and M, MIS, basic operational principles. ;;Aegerschou, Lundgren et. al., Planning, Designing of Port and Marine Terminals, John Wiley and Sons, 1983. 
Port Engineering and Operations: Proc. Conference of British Ports, New Castle upon Tynes, March, 1985, Thomas Telford, London, 1985. 
Hennes and Eske, Fundamentals of Transportation Engineering, McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1955. ;;
MM 422;Heat Transfer in heat treatment, quenching media, rapid heating, effect on structure and properties, heating methods, mechanism of quenching, quenchant variables, selection of quenching media. Thermodynamics, kinetics and mass effect of controlled atmosphere in heat treatment. Mechanism and kinetics of oxidation, decarburization and carburization. Vacuum as controlled atmosphere. Thermal and transformation stresses, their relation to temperature distribution. Shape and size distortion and control. Quench cracking, choice of steel and quenchant. 
;;C.R.Brooks, Heat Treatment of Ferrous Alloys, McGraw Hill Hemisphene, 1979. 
Metal Handbook, Vol.4, 9th Ed., HeatTreating, ASM, 1981. 
J.H.Holloman and L.D.Jaffee, Ferrous Metallurgical Design, Wiley, 1977. 
;;
CE 758;Wardrops principles of equilibrium, graph theoretics approach, network flows, minimum path trees, cutsets, primal level solutions; Entropy introduction, relationship between entropy, probability and uncertainty, entropy of a probability distribution of concept of entropy; Role of entropy in system dynamics, entropy maximum procedures. 
Transportation models, theory of trip distribution, mode split gravity and other models and route split inter regional commodity flows gravity models; Input-output model; Location models; The use of entropy in the analysis of utility maximizing system. 

;;;;
CE 760;Transportation system modelling, types of models, deterministic models, analog models, queing theory - queing models, stochastic models. Stimulation modelling case studies and comparison. 
Simulation model : problem formulation, goals and objectives, data collection and processing model formulation, representation and scanning techniques, simulation logics, stochastic data for simulation; Standing and stoping condition choice of programming language computer programming, validity model output case studies. 
;;Naylor, Thomas, H. Computer simulation experiments with models of economic systems, John Wiley and Sons, 1971. 
Naylor Thomas, H. and et. al., Computer simulation techniques, John Wiley and Sons, 1966. 
Wohl, Martin and B.V. Martin, Traffic system analysis for Engineers and Planners, McGraw-Hill Book Company Inc., 1967. 
Computer Scheduling of Public Transport, edited by J.M. Rousseaul, North Holland Publishing, 1985. 
;;
CE 763;Terrain Attributes and their significance : Topographic Relief, Slope and Aspects; Land use; Drainage-density, Pattern, texture etc; Geology; Lithology and structures; Soils and their properties; 
Sources of Terrain Data : Field surveys, Topographic and other Maps, Aerial Photographs, Satellite Images, 

Digital Terrain Modelling and Analysis : Sources, representation and interpolation; 

Products of Digital Elevation Models (DEMs) and their uses : Profiles, Sections, contours, slopes, shape and 3-D views, 

Applications of DEMs : Alignment selection, Earth Works, Water resources potential, Soil erosion potential, etc. 

Meteorological / Hydrological Data : Rainfall, humidity, sunshine, wind speed, etc. flow and sediment measurements etc. 

Data Base Development : Principles, programming and utilization; 

Compilation of Thematic Maps : Visual Interpretation and Digital Analysis, Digitization and Rasterization, 

Information Analysis Systems : Principles and applications. 

;;Lillesand, T.M. (1979) : Remote Snesing and Image Interpretation, John Wiley, N.Y. 
Mitchell, C.W. : Terrain Evaluation 
Alan Simpson (1986) : Advanced Techniques in dBASE - II Plus BPB Publications Nuew Delhi -1 
Burrough, P.A. (1986) ; Principles of Geographic Information Systems for land Resources Assessment. Clarendon Press. Oxford. 
;;
CE 714;Fundamentals of geotechnical engineering, terrain classification and evaluation, identification of construction materials, feasibility studies of highways and earth dams, canal and tunnel alignment studies, slope stability analysis, drainage networks, digital image processing, digital terrain modelling, geotechnical appraisal of civil engineering activities. ;;M.G. Spangler and R.L. Handy, Soil Engineering, 3rd Edn., Educational Publishers, 1973. 
Agricultural Handbook No.436, Soil Taxonomy, Soil survey staff, Soil conservation services, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, 1975. 
T.M. Lillesand and R.W. Kiefer, Remote Sensing and Image Interpretation, John Wiley and Sons, 1979. 
;;
MM 424;Different methods of non-destructive evaluation of materials. Industrial applications of NDE. Personnel training, qualification and certification. Radiography. Types of radiations, sources, methods of detection etc. Radiographic images quality, exposure techniques. Interpretation of radiographs. Fluoroscopy. Neutron radiography. Magnetic particle testing. Characteristics of magnetic fields, effect of discontinuities. Test procedure. Inspection and interpretation of test data. Ultrasonic testing. Ultrasonic waves test procedures, equipment, variables affecting test results. Mechanisation of testing. Pulse echo technique, C-scan, P-scan ultrasonic spectroscopy. Interpretation of test data. Liquid penetrant testing. Types of penetrants. Liquid penetrant indications, inspection procedures Eddy current testing. Theoretical analysis. Sensing elements. Factors affecting coil impedance. Interpretation of data. Acoustic emission test equipment. Interpretation of signals. Special test procedures for ceramics, composites etc. Residual stress measurement. XRD for non-destructive testing. Leak detection. Holography. 
;;Metals Handbook, Vol.XI, 8th Edition ASM, 1980. 
J.Krautkramer and H.Krautkramer, Ultrasonic Testing of Materials, Springer Verlag, 1983. 
H.B.Egerton, Ed., Non-Destructive Testing, Oxford University Press, 1969. 
R.C.McMaster, Ed., Non-Destructive Testing Handbook, Vol.I and Vol.II Ronald Press, N.Y., 1959. 
J.F.Hinsley, Non-Destructive Testing, MacDonald and Evans, London. 
;;
CE 716;Data collection, recording and handling, data storage and formats, analog and digital processing, image enhancement; Contrast, texture and edge enhancement, ratio images vegetation and soil indices; Classification - unsupervised, sigle pass and iterative; Supervised minimum distance to mean, maximum liklihood and Bayes methods, evaluation of accuracy, data transformation and compression techniques, applications. ;;R.O. Duda and P.E. Hart, Pattern Classification and Scene Analysis, John Wiley and Sons, N.Y., 1973. 
J.T. Tou and R.C. Gonzalez, Pattern Recognition Principles, Addison Wesly, 1974. 
P.H. Swain and S.M. Davis (Ed.), Remote Sensing : The Quantitative Approach, McGraw-Hill Book Co., N., 1978. 
;;
CE 710;Parametric watershed modelling, dimensional considerations of basin dynamics, kinematics of flood wave, evaluation of hydrologic parameters evapotranspiration, infiltration, watershed management, remote sensing in water resources, quantitative study of drainage basins, remote sensing in water pollution studies, snow mapping, ground water discharge, location of shallow acquifers, applications of remote sensing to flood mapping. ;;Ven Te Chow, Handbook of Applied Hydrology, McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1964. 
Keith P.B., Thompson et. al. (Ed.), Remote Sensing and Water Resources Management, American Water Resources Association, Urbana Illinois, 1973. 
R.N. Colwel (Ed.), Manual of Remote Sensing, Vol. I & II, American Society of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, Falls Church, Va. (1983). 
;;
CE 676;Objective of water resources development, economic analysis and discounting techniques, conditions of project optimality, graphic optimization techniques for multipurpose projects, analytical optimization techniques for water resources projected by linear programming, nonlinear programming and dynamic programming, optimization by simulation, mathematical models for large scale multipurpose projects, different case studies, stochastic optimization techniques, water quality subsystems, optimum operation model for reservoir systems by incremental dynamic programming, sequencing of multipurpose project. ;;Arthur Mass et.al., Design of Water Resources Systems, MacMillian, 1962. 
L.D. James and R. R. Leo, Economics of Water Resources Planning, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1971. 
W.A. Hall and J.A. Dracup, Water Resources Systems Engineering, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1970. ;;
CE 738;Objectives of network planning (equality and equity supply etc.). Principles of branching network systems for flexibility, alignment of nework components, determination of the network flows and demands. ;;P.A. Jensen, and J.W. Barnes, Network Flow Programming, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1980. 
;;
MM 425;Introduction. Characterisation of powders. Powder production and evaluation of properties. Theory and practice of compaction and sintering. Kinetics and mechanisms of sintering. Attainment of specific qualities by powder metallurgical processes. Typical products of powder metallurgy and their applications. ;;J.S.Hirschorn, Introduction to Powder Metallurgy, American Powder Metallurgy Institute, 1969. 
P.Ramakrishnan, Ed., Powder Metallurgy and Related High Temperature Materials, Oxford and IBH, 1985. 
F.V.Lenel, Powder Metallurgy, Metal Powder Industries Federation, Princeton, N.J., 1980. 
R.M.German, Powder Metallurgy Science, Metal Powder Industries Federation, Princeton, N.J., 1984. 
;;
CE 736;Definition of environment of Water Resources Projects - attributes, impacts, indicator and measurements; On-site, off-site impacts during various stages in the life cycle of the projects; Identification methodologies, matrix, checklists, network, overlays and other techniques of environmental impact assessment, water quality modelling of aquatic environment; Impacts on groundwater environment; Sources of groundwater contamination and methods of study and prevent adverse impacts; Environmental impacts of channelization irrigation, dredging, flood control, dams and reservoirs, ground water projects and other water resoruces projects; Case studies of environmental impacts due to water resources projects. ;;Canter L.W., Environmental Impact Assessment, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1977. 
Rau G. J. and Wooter C. D., Environmental Impact Analysis Handbook, McGraw-Hill, 1980. 
Westman W.E., Ecology, Impact Assessment and Environmental Planning, John Wiley, 1985. 
Biswas A.K., Qu Geping, Environmental Impact Assessment for Developing Countries, Tycooly International, London, 1987. 
Clark B.D., et. al., Environmental Impact Assessment, A bibiliography with Abstracts, Mansell, London, 1980. 
;;
MM 426;Extraction and refining of metals like copper, aluminium, zinc and lead. Processing and uses of these metals. 

;MM 309 (Exposure);A.K.Biswas and W.G.Davenport, Extractive Metallurgy of Copper, Pergamon, 1976. 
N.S.Severyukov et al : General Metallurgy, Mir Publishers. 
;;
MM 427;Electrode processes in aqueous, non-aqueous, and fused salt systems, Electrolytic cell. Use of solid electrolytes and concentration cells. Electrometallurgy of important metals like aluminium, zinc, copper etc. Theory of deposition of single metals and alloys. Electroforming, electrorefining, electropolishing, electromachining, etching and anodizing. Plating of common metals and alloys. Anodic processes such as anodizing, electrochemical machining and electropolishing. Electrothermics, Design and equipments for electrometallurgical plants. ;;C.L.Mantell, Electrochemical Engineering, 4th Ed., McGraw Hill, 1960. 
M.L.Creinhtlon and W.A.Koehler, Principles and Applications of Electrochemistry, Vol.I and II, 4th Ed. Wiley, 1951.;;
MM 429;Scope of quality control in metallurgical plants, Principles of control. Process quality. Control of attributes. Performance control. Control of Variable quality characteristics. Acceptance Control. Quality engineering and management. Case studies. 
;;B.L.Hansen, Quality Control-Theory and Applications, Prentice Hall, India 1966. 
;;
MM 431;Review of basic concepts of thermodynamics, statistical interpretation of entropy, thermodynamics of solid and liquid solutions, thermodynamic treatment of iron and steel production, extraction of metals, phase transformations. Extention of thermodynamic principles to the kinetics of reactions. ;;R.A.Swalin, Thermodynamics of Solids, Wiley, 1973. 
D.R.Gaskell, Introduction to Metallurgical Thermodynamics, MacGraw Hill, 1981. 
G.S.Upadhyaya and R.K.Dube, Problems in Metallurgical Thermodynamics, Pergamon, 1977. 
;;
CS 203;Mathematical logic, Propositions, Predicate logic, Set theory Operations on sets, Relations and Functions, Cardinality, Partial order, Equivalence relations, Peanoaxioms and mathematical induction. Combinatorics, Generating functions, Recurrence equations, Counting theorem and applications. Graphs hypergraphs, Paths, Transitive closure, Trees, Traversal problems, Spanning trees of graphs. Formal mathematical systems, Algebra, Subalgebra, Homomorphism, Automorphism. Elements of the theory of some algebras such as semigroups, Monoids, Groups, Integral domains, Rings, Fields, Lattices, Boolean algebras.;;S. Sahni, `Concepts in Discrete Mathematics" Narosa, Delhi, 1989. 
N. Biggsz `Discrete Mathematics;, Oxford/Clarendon Press, 1985. 
F.R. Norris, Discrete Structures: An Introduction to Mathematics for Computer Science, Prentice Hall, 1985. A Gill, Applied 
Algebra for Computer Sciences, Prentice Hall, 1976. 
;;
CS 210;Fundamentals of switching theory : 
Boolean Algebra and switching functions. Representations and properties of switching functions.
Abstract realisation of switching functions. Optimisation techniques. Design of PLAs.


Sequential machines : 
Synchronous and asynchronous m/cs. Representation through languages. Abstract realisation of sequential m/cs. State assignment and minimisation. Introduction to automatic logic synthesis. 
Concrete realisation of control units : 
Case study. 
;CS 203;S.H. Unger, `Essence of Logic Circuits, Prentice Hall, 1989. 
D. Green, `Modern Logic Design, Addison Wesley, 1989. 
M. Bolton, `Digital System DEsign with Programmable Logic,Addison Wesley, 1990. 
;;
MM 432;Crystal chemistry of ceramic structures; spinel, garnet, perovskite and pyrochlor structures; Electronic transport in ceramic materials, ionic conductivity in ceramics (superionic conductors), solid state battery and sensor materials. Ferroelectricity, primary and secondary ferroics, piezoelectricity, PZT materials, electrooptic materials. Ceramic insulators, substrates, methods of processing. Ferrimagnetism, hysteresis, magnetically and soft ceramics, microwave ferrites, magnetooptic materials. ;;Electroceramics; Materials: Properties and Applications; A.J. Moulson and J.M. Herbert, Chapmann and Hall, 1990. 
Principles of Electronic Ceramics, L.L. Hench and J.K. West, John Wiley and Sons, 1990. 
Ceramic Materials for Electronics: Processing, Properties and Applications: Ed. R.C. Buchanan, Marcel Dekkar, 1986.;;
CS 212;Steady State and transient switching characteristics of diodes and transistors, digital integrated circuit technologies, analysis of basic circuits in these families, PLAs, PALs and PLDs, flip - flops, memory elements, line drivers, multiplexers, demultiplexers, counters, encoders, decoders, registers, ALUs, interfacing techniques, transmission line effects, design examples.

;EE 201;H. Taub & D. Schilling, Digital Integrated Electronics, McGraw Hill, 1977 
D. A. Hodges & H. G. Jackson, Analysis & Design of Digital Integrated Circuits, International Student Ed., McGraw Hill 1983. 
Richard S. Sandige, Modem Digital Design, McGraw Hill, 1990. 
;;
MM 434;Historical development. Fundamentals of vacuum technology, rotary, diffusion, roots blower, turbomolecular, titanium sublimation and cryopumps, low and high vacuum gauges. Thermodynamics and kinetics of thin film growth, nucleation and modes of growth, surface and interface phenomena. Techniques of film deposition; physical vapor deposition, sputtering, various chemical vapor deposition methods, molecular beam epitaxy and liquid phase epitaxy, Langmuir-Blodgett films. Characterization of thin films; structural electrical and optical properties, low angle XRD, LEED and RHEED, ellipsometry, XPS. Applications; semiconductor thin films, hard coatings, barrier layers, optical and infrared windows. ;;Handbook of Thin Film Technology. Ed. L.I. Maissel and R. Glang (McGraw Hill New York, 1970. 
Thin Film Processes, J.L. Vossen and W. Kern, Academic Press, New York, 1978. 
Thin Film Phenomena, K.L. Chopra, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1969. 
Scientific Foundations of Vacuum Techniques, 2nd Ed., S. Dushman and J.M. Lafferty, Wiley, New York, 1962. ;;
CS 214;Introduction to data structures. Introduction to complexity of algorithms.

Creation and manipulation of linear data structures viz. arrays, lists, stacks, queues and nonlinear data structures viz. trees, graphs, heaps. Comparison of different data structures.

File organization methods, Internal and external sorting. Abstract data types.

;CS 203;A. V. Aho, J.D. Ullman, Data Structures, Addision Wesley, 1984. 
E. Horowitz, S. Sahni, Fundamentals of Data Structures, Galgotia Publishers 1983. 
D. E. Knuth, The art of Computer Programming, Vol.1, Narosa Publishers, 19 85. 
N. Wirth, Algorithms + Data Structures Programs, Prentice Hall, 1976. 
;;
CS 216;iterative methods, solution of eigenvalue problems. Introduction to numerical solution of initial and boundary value problems.;;C.E.Froberg, Introduction to Numerical Analysis, 2nd ed., Addison Wesley, 1981. 
A Ralston, First Course in Numerical Analysis, McGraw Hill Kogakusha, 197 8. 
E.V.Krushnamurthy, S.K.Sen, Computer Based Numerical Algorithms, East West Pres s, 1976. 
G. Dahlquist and D.Bjork, `Numerical Methods, Prentice Hall, 1976. 
;;
CS 290;Experimentation with switching functions using software models. Use of simulation tools and minimisation tools for design of circuits realising switching functions. Experiments with state assignment and machine minimisation. Use of simulation and other tools for machine design. Design of a control unit.;;;;
MM 436;Practical aspects of single crystal growth from solution and melt. Bridgemann, Czochralski, Skull-melting, flux and other methods of growth and their applicability. Growth of oxides for applications in superconductivity and magnetoresistance. Controlled atmosphere annealing and processing case studies. Anisotropy and determination of anisotropic constants from characterization. Symmetry and modern methods of structure determination for single crystals. Technological applications. ;;J.J. Gilman, The art and science of growing crystals, Wiley, 1963. 
W.G. Pfann, Zone melting, Wiley, 1966 
B.R. Pamplin, Crystal Growth, Pergamon, 1975. 
;;
CS 292;Study of device characteristics of diodes and transistors. Familiarity wi th the instruments for measuring various parameters of diodes and transistors - curve tracers, beta testers, etc. Use of logic probes, pulsers, logic analys ers, etc for trouble shooting. Digital Circuits using TTL/MOS ICs. Design, bread boarding and testing. Designing with PLAs, PALs, PLDs. Software support, PCB software.;;;;
CS 294;Experiments in Pascal programming. Experimentation with various data structures. Comparison of asymptotic complexity with real behaviour of algorithms.;;;;
CS 295;Introduction to the UNIX operating system, vi and emacs editors, concept of she ll, environment variables, notion of UNIX processes and memory management, pipes.
UNIX file system and directory structure, regular expression, basic UNIX c ommands, Stream editor sed, utilities like, cut, paste, sort, etc.

Shell programming language, AWK, PERL and other tools

Program development and maintenance tools, MAKE and SCCS.

Introduction to C, basic data types and control structures, important sta ndard library functions, preliminary usage of C arrays.

;;;;
CS 301;Models of computation. Algorithm analysis, order arithmetic, time and space complexities, average and worst case analysis, lower bounds. 
Algorithm design techniques: divide and conquer, search and traversals, dynamic programming, backtracking, branch and bound. 

Sorting and searching algorithms, combinatorial algorithms, string processing algorithms, algebraic algorithms, set algorithms. Hard problems and approximation algorithms. 

Problem classes P, NP, NP-hard and NP-complete, deterministic and nondeterministic polynomial-time algorithms. Approximation algorithms for some NP-complete problems. 

;;D.E.Knuth The Art of Computer Programming, Vols. 1 and 3, Addison Wesley, 1968, 1975. 
A.V.Aho, J.E.Hopcroft, J.D.Ullman, Design and Analysis of Algorithms, Ad dison Wesley, 1976. 
E.Horowitz, S.Sahni, Fundamentals of Computer Algorithms, Galgotia Publi shers, 1984. 
K.Melhorn, Data Structures and Algorithms, Vols.1 and 2, Springer Verlag, 1984. 
P.W.Purdom, Jr. and C.A.Brown, `The Analysis of Algorithms, Holt Rhinehart and Winston, 1985. 
;;
MM 428;Role of gases in metals. Determination of gases in metals-vacuum fusion and inert gas fusion methods, mass spectroscopy and gas chromatography, automated techniques-design, operation and application. Advanced analytical techniques in materials research-adsorption, surface studies, structural analysis of lattice components. ;;R.F.Bunshah Ed., Techniques of Metals Research, Vol.1, Part 1 & 2 Interscience 1970. 
C.W.Ewing, Instrumental methods of chemical analysis, 4th Ed., McGraw-Hill, New York. 
D.A.Skoog, Principles of Instrumental Analysis, 3rd Ed., Philadelphia, 1985. 
;;
CS 307;Fundamental concepts of signal analysis, orthogonal functions, Fourier Analysis, Fourier and Laplace transforms, linear systems, Sampling, Discrete Fourier Transform. FFT algorithms. Sequences and transforms, Discrete systems.
Prentice Hall, 1975. 

;;C.F.Chen, `One Dimensional Digital Signal Processing, Marcel Dekker Inc., 1979. 
A.V.Oppenheim et. al., `Signals and Systems, Prentice Hall, 1983. 
;;
CS 311;Function of small signal models of electronic devices such as diodes, bipolar and MOS transistors, thyristors, clipping and clamping circuits, amplifiers, operational amplifiers, oscillators, applications, filters, power supplies, AD/DA converters, SMPS and UPS.

Nature of Business Systems. Data Processing Tasks, Modern Storage devices and other peripherals.

Data Models, ER Diagrams and Data Flow diagrams.

Introduction to Relational Theory. Normalisation, File Design.

SQL and host language interfaces, User Interface development :screens, reports, transactions.

Use of leading product to construct a business application.

;CS 212;Jacob Millman and A. Grabel, `Microelectronics, McGraw Hill, 1987.

James A. Senn, Analysis and Design of Information Systems,McGraw-Hill, 1990 
Henry F.Korth and Abraham Silberschatz, Database System Concepts,McGraw-Hill, 1991 
Ramez Elmasri and Shamkant Navathe, Fundamentals of Database Systems, Benjamin Cummings, 1993 
;;
CS 314;Nature of Business Systems. Data Processing Tasks, Modern Storage devices and other peripherals.
Data Models, ER Diagrams and Data Flow diagrams.

Introduction to Relational Theory. Normalisation, File Design.

SQL and host language interfaces, User Interface development :screens, reports, transactions.

Use of leading product to construct a business application.

;;James A. Senn, Analysis and Design of Information Systems, McGraw-Hill, 1990 
Henry F.Korth and Abraham Silberschatz, Database System Concepts, McGraw-Hill, 1991 
Ramez Elmasri and Shamkant Navathe, Fundamentals of Database Systems, Benjamin Cummings, 1993 
;;
MM 442;Models and prototype. Importance of modelling in engineering. Steps in mathematical modelling. Some numerical techniques for modelling. Case studies; class room development of models for materials processing and other processes. Models in simulation, optimisation and control. ;;R. Aris: Mathematical Modelling Techniques, Pitman, London, 1978 
J.L Casti: Alternate Realities: Mathematical Models of Nature and Man, John Wiley and Sons, 1989. 
;;
CS 319;Mathematical preliminaries, alphabet, strings, languages states, transitions. Finite automata and regular expressions, pushdown automata and context free languages.


Turing machines: 
Turing hypothesis, Turing computability, Nondeterminist ic, multitape and other versions of Turing machines. Church"s thesis , primitive recurssive functions, Godelization, recursive functions, recursively innumerable sets and Turing computability. Universal Turing machines. 
Unsolvability: 
The halting problem, partial solvability, Turing enumerability, The acceptability and decidability, unsolvable problems about Turing Machines and recursive function. Post"s correspondence problem., Examples.
Ueview of propositional and predicate calculus: syntax, satisfiability , validity, 

;CS 203;A.V.Aho, J.E. Hopcroft and J.D.Ullman, `Introduction to Automata, Languages and Computation, Addison Wesley, 1980. 
H.R. Lewis and C.H.Papadimitrou, `Elements of the Theory of Computation, Prentice Hall Inc., 1981. 
V.J. Rayward Smith, `A First Course in Computability, Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, 1986. 
M.Davis and E.J.Weyuker `Computabiligy, Complexity and Languages" Academic press 1982. 
D.Gries, `Science of Programming, Springer Verlag, New York, 1981. 
;;
MM 444;Introduction. Definitions and Classifications. Structure and properties of glass, boron, alumina, carbon, SiC, aramid, polyethylene and other fibers. Particulate and whisker reinforcements. General properties of metal, ceramic and polymer matrices. Processing of composites based on these matrices including in-situ composites. Reinforcement-Matrix interface. Types of interfacial bondings. Sizing: Silane and other coupling agents. Methods of measuring interfacial bond-strength. Mechanical properties of unidirectional, short fiber and particulate composites. ;;F.L. Matthews and R.D. Rawlings, Composite Materials: Engineering and Science, Chapman and Hall, Madras, 1994. 
Composites: Engineered Materials Handbok, Vol.1, ASM International, 1988. 
K.K. Chawla, Composite Materials, Springer Verlag, New York, 1987. 
K.K. Chawla, Ceramic Matrix Composites, Chapman and Hall, London, 1993. 
;;
CS 324;Overview of the translation process, Lexical analysis : Hand coding and automatic generation of lexical analysers.

Parsing theory : Top down and bottom up parsing algorithms. Automatic generation of parsers.

Error recovery : Error detection & recovery. Ad-hoc and systematic methods. Intermediate code generation : Different intermediate forms. Syntax directed translation mechanism and attributed definition.

Run time memory management : Static memory allocation and stack based memory allocation schemes. Symbol table management.

Code generation : Machine model, order of evaluation, register allocation and code selection.

Code optimization : Global data flow analysis, A few selected optimizations like common sub expression removal, loop invariant code motion, strength reduction etc.

;CS 395, CS 319;A.V.Aho, Ravi sethi, J.D.Ullman, Compilers, Tools and Techniques, Addison - Wesley, 1987. 
D.M.Dhamdhere, Compiler Construction - Principles and Practice, Macmillan, India, 1981. 
Tremblay J.P. and Sorenson P.G., `The Theory and practice of Compiler writing" McGraw Hill, 1984. 
Waite W.N. and Goos G., `Compiler Construction"Springer Verlag, 1983. 
;;
MM 601;Free electron theory of metals, Brillouin zone, energy bands, electron transport, thermoelectricity, elemental and compound semiconductors, p-n junction, transistors. Tunnel and Gunn diods, light emitting diodes, laser and photovoltaic materials, field effect transistor and integrated circuits. 

Magnetic ordering: ferro-and ferrimagnetism, exchange interaction, magnetic domains, hysteresis, soft and hard magnetic materials, magnetic bubble materials, applications of magnetic resonance. 

Dielectric behaviour of materials, piezo-electricity, ferroelectricity, superconductivity in metals and its applications; Amorphous materials and their applications. 

;Nil;C.Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, Wiley, 5th edition, 1990. 
C.M. Srivastava and C. Srinivasan, Science of Engineering Materials, Wiley Eastern, 1987. 
R.E. Hummel, Electronic Properties of Materials, 2nd edition, Narosa, 1994. 
;;
CS 325;An Overview of Computer Organisation, Functional Blocks, Data Representation , Fixed, Floating and Decimal Arithmetic, Bit Slice Microprocessors, Full Adde rs, Ripple Carry Adders, Carry Look Ahead Principle, CLA Adders.

Design Considerations, Design Exercise of an Arithmetic Unit, Conventional and Microprogram Concepts and Control Unit Design Considerations, Instruction Cycle, CPU Design Exercise.

Semiconductor Memory and Memory Organization, Design Example / Modes - Programmed, Interrupt, DMA, Channels, I/O Processors, Peripheral Devices & Their C haracteristics.

Multiprogramming and Time Sharing, Virtual Memory Concepts, Introduction to Advanced Computer Architecture.

;CS 210, CS 212;M.R.Bhujade, Digital Computer Design Principles with Introduction to Microproces sors, Pitambar, 1982. 
J.P.Hayes, Computer Architecture and Organisation, McGraw Hillm 1978. 
William Stallings, Computer Organization and Architecture, Macmillan, 1990. 
;;
MM 603;Review of fundamentals in fluid flow, heat transfer and mass transfer. Introduction to turbulent flow phenomena. Heat transfer with phase change. 
A few detailed examples of transport phenomena applications to materials processing. 

;;R.B.Bird, W.E.Stewart and E.N.Lightfoot; Transport Phenomena, McGraw-Hill, N.Y., 1960. 
M.Lesieur; Turbulence in Fluids, M.Nijhoff Pub., Dordrecht, 1987. 
W.Kurz and D.J.Fischer; "Fundamentals of Solidification" Trans Tech. Pub., 1986. 
;;
CS 326;Models as abstraction of real world, types and classification; model building; course vs. fine grain building of models.

Applications to computing, economic, electronic, environmental, industrial, organizational, service and telecommunication areas.

Elements of algorithms and complexity, performance criteria, heuristics.


Graphs and Flows : 
Shortest paths, spanning trees, minimal cost flows, probabilistic networks, CPM/PERT, integrality of solutions. 
Linear Optimization : 
Linear algebra and convexity concepts, simplex and interior point algorithms, duabity concepts sensitivity analysis. Extensions to nonlinear optimization. Queueing models and applications, exponential distribution and the poisson process, Markovian queues, semi-markovian models, little"s formula, bulk queues, modelling in computing systems. Reliability concepts. 
;CS 214;A.Ravindran, D.T.Phillips, and J.Solberg, Operations Research: Principles and Practice, Prentice Hall, 2nd Edition, 1987.r Under graudates, Springer - Verlag, 1984. 
M.M.Systo, N.Deo and J.S.Kowalski, Discrete Optimization Algorithms with Pascal Programs, Prentice Hall, 1983. 
H.S.Wilf, Algorithms and Complexity, Prentice Hall, 1986. 
M.R.Garey and D.S.Johnson, Computers and Intract ability, W.H.Freeman, 1979. 
;;
MM 604;Principles of composites and composite reinforcement. 
Strengthening and interfacial relations in composites. Mechanisms and Fracture Mechanics of Composites, Environmental Effects and NDT of Composites. Dispersion strengthened, particle reinforced and fiber reinforced composite materials. High strength, high temperature materials. special products, and their structure and properties. 

;;L.J.Broutman and R.M.Krock (Ed.), Modern Composite Materials, Addison-Wesley, 1967. 
K.K.Chawla, Composite Materials - Science & Engineering, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1987. 
Composites, ASM International, Vol.1, Engineered Materials Handbook, 1988. 
Mechanisms & Mechanics of Composite Fracture, Eds. R.B. Bhagat, S.G.Fishman, R.J. Arsenault, ASM International, 1993. 
;;
CS 328;Introduction to the principles of major styles of programming such as imperative, functional, object-oriented and logic programming. Basic features of representative languages. Implementation issues.

;CS 395;E.Horowitz, Programming Languages, Galgotia Publications, 1985. 
T.W.Pratt, Programming Languages: Design and Implementation, Prentice Hall of India, 1983. 
C.Gbezzi, M. Jazayeri, Programming Language Concepts, Wiley, 1982. 
R.D.Tennent, `Principles of programming languages, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi, 1981. 
;;
CS 330;Introduction to Architectural Details of 8/16/32 Bit Microprocessors, Selected Case Studies, Support Components: Memories, Serial and Parallel Interfaces, Peripheral Controllers, DMA Controllers, Interface Design Exercises.

Microprocessor Assembly Language Programming, Microcomputer Operating Systems, Microcomputer Development Systems, Selected Applications and Design Problems.

;CS 325;Vincent Del Toro, `Electromechanical Devices for Energy Conversion and Control System", Prentice Hall, 1978. 
R.Gaonkar, `Microprocessor Architecture , Programming and Applications", Wiley, 1986. 
Aditya P. Mathur, `Introduction to Microprocessors", Tata McGraw Hill, 1989. 
M.Rafiguzzaman, Microprocessors and Microcomputer Based System, Harper and Row, 1984. 
J.P.Hayes, Digital System Design and Microprocessors, McGraw Hill, 1985. 
Kenneth L. Short, `Microprocessors and Programmed Logic, Prentice Hall, 1988. 
;;
MM 605;Compositional and structural characterisation of materials. Bulk and trace analytical techiques, surface analysis, resonance and thermal methods of analysis. 
Sampling and statistical treatment of analytical data structural analysis by diffraction techniques. 

Characterisation of materials for microstructure - optical and electron microscopy, quantitative microscopy. 

;;Metals handbook Vol. 9 "Characterisation of Materials", 10th Edition, 1986, American Society of Metals, Metals Park, OH, USA. 
H.H.Willard, L.L.Merritt, J.A.Dean and F.A.Settle, "Instrumental Methods of analysis", 6th Edition, 1986, CBS Publishers & Distributors, Delhi. 
;;
CS 390;
Study of D.C.servomotors, single phase transformers, familiarity with 8 bit and 16 bit microprocessor kits.
execution of some selected programmes in machine and assembly language, exercises on interfacing with microprocessor kits, Familiarity with the microprocessor development systems, use of In-circuit emulators, mini projects.

;;S.R.Bhat et. al., Microprocessor Laboratory Primer, Centre for Electronics Design and Technology (CEDT) IISc, Bangalore 1985. 
G.N.Revankar, Experiments with 8085A Microprocessors, Microprocessor Application Centre, IIT-Bombay. 
Intel Manuals on Microcomputer Development System. 
;;
CS 391;Experiments to study small signal behaviour of transistors, use of oscilloscopes in various measurements, measurements of various parameters of AC and DC amplifiers, DC amplifiers in the operational amplifier configurations, selected applications of operational amplifiers, Familiarity with analog computation and selected exercises, study of A/D and D/A converters, measurements on Linear and Switched mode power supplies.;;;;
CS 394;Experiments in systems programming: table creation and access, evaluation of different hashing functions, implementation of some assembler/macro-processor modules. Generation of lexical analysers and parsers using LEX and YACC tools. Systems programming project.;;;;
MM 607;Nucleation and formation of macroscopic defects, defect characterization techniques; Crystal growth, point defects, dislocation interelationships in elemental and compound semiconductors; diffusion and oxidation, radiation-induced defects, thermal and laser annealing of ion implantation and neutron damage; correlation of atomic structure with the electronic properties of dislocation, properties of semiconductor grain boundaries in polycrystralline materials used in active and passive electronic devices. ;;K.V.Ravi, Imperfections & impurities in semiconductor silicon, John Wiley, New York, 1981. 
W.R.Runyan, Semiconductor measurements and instrumentation. McGraw Hill, New York, 1975. 
;;
CS 395;Architecture of 8-bit and 16 bit microprocessors. Machine language and assembly language of 8 bit and 16 bit microprocessors, selected exercises.;;G.Kane, D.Hawkins, L.Leventhal, 68000 Assembly Language Programming", McGraw Hill, 1986. 
Osborne, A. "Introduction to Microcomputers", Vol. 1-3, McGraw Hill, 1978. 
Mathur A.P. "Introduction to Microprocessors", 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 1989. 
James W. Coffron, "Practical Hardware details for 8080, 8085, Z80 & 6800 Microprocessor Systems", Prentice Hall, 1981. Richard C. Detmer, "Fundamentals of Assembly Language Programming using the IBM PC and Compatibles", Galgotia Publications (P) Ltd. 1991. 
;;
CS 399;Suitable experiments to support the Digital Signal Processing course will be included in the Laboratory by the instructor.;;;;
CS 398;Experiments in COBOL on topics such as 
indexed and relative files 
report generation 
screen section (interactive processing ). 
Experiments in usage of tools and packages like spread-sheets, FOXPRO, etc. Laboratory experiments in use of interactive SQL, 4GLs, client- server environments like power Builder, Gupta SQL, etc. Designing an application using these packages.;;;;
CS 418;Advanced Applications of topics considered in CS 307 ;;;;
CS 441;Three schema architecture, Software architecture of a typical DBMS. Storage Structure : B+-trees, Hashing, Multi dimensional indexes.
Query processing: Selects, Projects, Joins, Aggregate operators.

Query Optimization : Heuristic based optimization cost based optimization.

Buffer Management, Concurrency Control and Recovery.

Introduction to Advanced in Topics : Distributed database basis-Homogenous and Hetrogenous, Objects oriented Data Bases, Temporal databases.

;;Henry F. Korth and Abraham Silbersehatz, Database System Concepts, McGraw Hill, 1991 
Ramez Elmasri and Shamkant Novathe, Fundamentals of Database Systems, Benjamin Cummings, 1993 
Jim Gray and Andreas Reuter, Transaction Processing : Concepts and Techniques, Moragan Kauffman Publishers, 1993. 
;;
CS 443;Aim and scope of artificial intelligence. Problem spaces and problem characteristics.
Problem solving techniques: generate-and- test, hill climbing, search, problem reduction, constraint propagation, means-ends analysis. Heuristics for problem solving.

Game playing: minimax and alpha-beta procedures. Some case studies.

LISP and PROLOG : exercise from AI.

Knowledge representation: procedural and declarative approaches, production system formalism, predicate logic, semantic nets, conceptual dependency, frames and scripts. Conceptual graphs.

Rule based systems, expert systems, Case studies. Resolution in predicate logic, unification, question answering, natural deduction, theorem proving.

Selected topics in natural language understanding, pattern recognition, vision and learning . Planning in blocks world. Learning.
;;E.Rich, Artificial Intelligence, McGraw Hill, International Student ed. 19 83. 
N.J.Nilsson, Principles of Artificial Intelligence, Springer Verlag, 1980. 
G.F.Luger and W.A.Stubblefield, `AI and the design of expert systems"Benjamin/cummings, 1989. 
P.H.Winston, Artificial Intelligence, 2nd Ed., Addison Wesley, 1984. 
;;
CS 447;Overview of operating systems : 
Batch processing, multiprogramming, time-sharing and real time systems. 
Concurrent processes : 
Communication and synchronisation. Process management, deadlocks. 
Main memory management : 
Paging, segmentation, sharing of programs and data. Device management. 
Information management: 
File system, security. A case study of UNIX. 
;;P.B.Hansen, Operating System Principles, Prentice Hall, 1973. 
P.B.Hansen, Architecture of Concurrent Programs, Prentice Hall, 1977. 
J.L.Perterson, A.Silberschatz, Operating System Concepts, Addison-Wesley, 1983. 
D.M.Dhamdhere, Introduction to System Software, Tata McGraw Hill, 1986. 
A.C.Shaw, Logic Design of Operating Systems, Prentice Hall, 1974. 
M.J.Bach, `The design of UNIX operating system, Prentice Hall of India, 1986. 
A.S.Tanenbaum, Operating System : Design and Implementation, Prentice Hall of India, 1989. 
;;
CS 455;Review of data transmission issues. Asychronous and synchronous transmission. Error detection techniques. Transmission Communications Data link control. Topology and access protocols. Communications switching protocols. Interfacing and communication architecture.;;L.Kleinrock, Queuing Systems, Vol.II: Computer Applications, John Wiley, 1976. 
A.S.Tanenbaum, Computer Networks, Prentice-Hall, 1981. 
W.Chou, Computer Communications, Vol.I: Principles, Prentice-Hall, 1983. 
P.E.Green(ed). Computer Network Architectures and Protocols. Plenum Press, 1983. 
W.Stallings, Data and Computer Communications, Macmillan, 1985. 
;;
CS 457;An overview of I/O Modes, I/O Channels, I/O Processors, Case Studies, Serial and Parallel Interfaces, RS 232C/422C Bus Standards, IEEE 488, VME, MULTIBUS, SCSI, EISA, Selected Peripheral Devices and Characteristics, Peripheral Controller Chips, Microcontrollers, Interfacing Techniques and Exercises, Operating Systems-I/O Drivers, System Integration Concepts, Desi gn Exercises.;;B.Soucek, Minicomputers in Data Processing and Simulation, John Wiley, 1972. 
D.Hall, Microprocessors and Interfacing: Programming and Hardware, McGraw Hill, 1986. 
B.A.Artwick, Microcomputer Interfacing, Prentice Hall, 1980. 
R.Zaks, A.Lesea, Microprocessors Interfacing Techniques, Sybex Inc., 1979. 
Joseph Di Giacomo, `Digital Bus Handbook, McGraw Hill, 1990. 
Peripherals, Inter Corporation, 1990 John B. Peatman, Design with Microcontrolle rs, McGraw Hill, 1988. 
;;
MM 608;Phenomenology of solid interfaces and solid interfacial energies. 
Structural models for grain- and interphase-boundaries. 

Determination of interfacial energies. Interfacial characterization. Grain boundary segregation. Role of interfacial phenomena in deformation and failure of materials. 

Interfacial phenomena in thin films and composite materials. 

;;
L.E.Murr, Interfacial Phenomena in Metals and Alloys, Addison-Wesley, 1975. 
G.A.Chadwick and D.A.Smith (Ed.), Grain Boundary Structure and Properties, Academic press, 1976. 
R.W. Balluffi (seminar chairman), Grain Boundary Structure and Kinetics, ASM, 1980. 
M.E. Kassner and T.G. Langden (Guest eds), Mater. Sci. Eng., A, Vol. A166, 1993. 

;;
CS 462;Queueing models of scheduling in batch and time sharing systems. Priority scheduling. Queueing models of a disc system. Queueing models for multiprogrammed systems.;;E.G.Coffman, P.J.Denning, Operating Systems Theory, Prentice Hall, 1973. 
P.B.Hansen, Operating System Principles, Prentice Hall, 1973. 
L.Kleinrock, Queueing Systems, Vol.I and II, Wiley, 1976. 
;;
CS 464;Advanced architectural features suitable to high level computational needs such as symbolic manipulation, graphic processing and logic inferencing (logic programming).
Advanced architectures like parallel/concurrent architectures: SIMD, MIMD, array processors, pipelined architectures. Distributed architectures. Computer networks. Data flow architectures.

Case studies of some contemporary advanced architectures.

Performance evaluation of systems and comparison of different architectures.

;;K.Hwang, F.Briggs, Parallel Processing and Computers Architecture, McGraw Hill, 1984. 
D.P.Siewiorek, C.G.Bell, A.Newell, Computer Structures; Principles and Examples, McGraw Hill, 1982. 
;;
MM 609;Equilibrium equations in cartesian, cylindrical and spherical co-ordinates. Levy-Von Mises plasticity equations. Methods of solving problems in mechanical working : freebody equilibrium, lower and upper bound, slip line field. Viscoplasticity. Plane and axisymmetric forging. Closed die forging and coining. Flow of metal through conical dies. Drawing and extrusion. Cross-spiral rolling. 
Miscellaneous processes of working. 

;;E.G.Thomsen, C.T.Yang and S.Kobayashi, Mechanics of Plastic Deformation in Metal Processing, MacMillan, 1965. 
B.Avitzur, Metal Forming : Processes and Analysis, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1977. 
;;
CS 466;Functional Programming : 
Introduction, Lambda Calculus, Translating high level functional language into the lambda calculus, structured types, semantics of pattern matching and efficient compilation, List comprehension, Polymorphic type checking, Graph reduction of lambda expressions, lazy evaluation, Supercombinators, SK combinators, G-code, strictness analysis, SASL, MIRANDA. 
Logic Programming : 
Logic and Reasoning, Logic programs, Implementation of logic programs, Applications, PROLOG, PARLOG. 
Logic Programming : 
Logic and Reasoning, Logic programs, Implementation of logic programs, Applications, PROLOG, PARLOG. 
;;Simon L. Peyton Jones, `The Implementation of Functional Programming Languages, Prentice Hall, International series in Computer Science, 1987. 
Christopher John Hogger, `Introduction to Logic Programming, Academic Press, 1984. ;;
CS 468;Introduction to mathematical aspects, review of matrix methods and vector spaces, probability and decision making, formal languages and parsing, fuzzy decision methods, stochastic languages.
Parametric and nonparametric methods of classification, basic results, supervised and unsupervised learning schemes. Neural Network algorithms and learning, Adalines and Madalines.

Formal languages and higher dimensional languages for pattern recognition. Grammatical inference, Gold"s results on identification of languages in the limit, ramifications.

Concept learning, Valiants model of polynomial learnability. Complexity of inductive inference.

Learning in Neural Networks, Hopfield Nets, Backpropagation Networks, Simulated Annealing, Boltzmann Machines. Genetic Algorithms.

;;Duda R.O. and Hart P.E., `Pattern Classification and Scene Analysis, Wiley, 1974. 
K.S.Fu, `Syntactic Pattern Recognition, Academic Press, 1980. 
Minsky M.L. and Papert S, `Papert S, `Perceptions", MIT Press, 1988. 
McClelland J.L. and Rumelhart D.E. (Ed.) `Parallel Distributed Processing", MIT Press, 1986, Vol. 1 & 2. ;;
CS 470;Selected illustrative examples of simulation applications. Models: Structural, Process, Continuous, Discrete, Deterministic, Random, input/output, static, dynamic, multilevel. Simulation: Analog/Digital/Hybrid, verification, validation.

Data Modelling and Analysis : 
Population parameters, hypotheses testing, confidence-intervals, goodness of fit, estimating transient/steady-state characteristics, variance reduction. 
Simulation Process : 
Problem formulating, model building, data acquisition, model translation, verification, validation, strategic and tactical planning, experimentation, analysis of results, implementation and documentation. 
Simulation Languages : 
Examples from SIMSCRIPT, GPSS, GASP, SIMULA, etc. 
;;G.Gordon, `System Simulation", 2nd ed., Prentice Hall, 1978. 
Narsing Deo, `System Simulation with Digital Computers", Prentice Hall, 1976. 
J.R. Leigh, `Modelling and Simulation", Peter Peregrims Ltd., 1983. 
A.M.Law, W.D.Kelton, `Simulation Modelling and Analysis", Mcgraw Hill, 1982. 
;;
CS 472;Introduction to VLSI technology. Complexity of design and need for automation. Placement and routing. PLA"s : folding and partitioning. Physical layout design. Design rule checking. Simulation, testing and design for testability. Reliability and yield analysis.;;C.A.Mead, L.A.Conway, Introduction to VLSI, Addison Wesley, 1980. 
J.D.Ullman, Computational Aspects of VLSI, Computer Science Press, 1984. 
T.C.Hu, E.S.Kuh, VLSI Circuit Layout: Theory and Design, IEEE Press, 1985. 
M.A.Breuer,ed., Design automation of Digital Systems, Prentice Hall, 1972. 
T. Ohtsuki, series ed., Advanced in CAD for VLSI, Vols 2-7, North-Holland, 1986. 
;;
CS 474;Introduction to the development of the cognitive view, perception, pattern recognition, picture processing, communication and language processing, the generic scheme, World views and models, relationships to information processing systems.
The paragigms of verbal learning, learning theories, coding processes, short-term and long term memories, encoding processes, organization in memory, simulation models of learning and memory, mnemonics, language comprehension, syntactic and semantic issues, sentence processing, text processing, comparisons of sentence and picture processing, concept formation, puzzle and problem solving.

Contributions of cognitive psychology to advances in artificial intelligence, computer based learning/teaching systems, knowledge acquisition and knowledgebased systems, expert systems.

;;Marcde May, `The Cognitive Paradigm", Reidel, 1982. W.Kintsch, `Memory and Cognition", John Wiley, 1977. 
L.W.Gregg, `Cognition in Learning and Memory", John Wiley 1972. 
R.C.Schank, P. Childers, `Cognitive Computer on Language, Learning and AI", 1984. 
P.C. Kendall, `Advances in Cognition Behavioural Research and Therapy" Academic Press, 1984. 
;;
CS 475;Interactive graphics programming, Coordinate systems. Graphical output primitives and segments. Concept of logical input devices. Examples from GKS and Core.
Graphics hardware : Vector and Raster CRTs Display controllers and processors, plotters, keyboard, Light pen, Tablet and Stylus, Mouse.

Graphics system software: Clipping, Normalising transformation, Display file o rganisation.

Raster conversion algorithms, Implementation of logical input devices.

Geometric transformation : Homogeneous coordinate systems, Matrix formulation and concatenation of transformations.

3-D graphics : 3-D output primitives specification and computation of projections, 3-D clipping, Hidden line and hidden surface elimination, Models of illumination and shading.

;;J.D.Foley, A Van Dam, Fundamentals of Interactive Computer Graphics, Addi son Wesley, 1981. 
W.M.Newman, R.Sproull, Principles of inter active Computer Graphics, 2/e, McGraw Hill, 1979. 
D.F.Rogers, Procedural Elements for Computer Graphics, McGraw Hill, 1985. 
D.F.Rogers, Mathematical Elements for Computer Graphics, 2/e, McGraw Hill, 1989. 
S.Harrington, Computer Graphics : A Programming Approach, 2/e, McGraw Hill, 1987. 
G.Enderle, K. Kansy, G. Pfaff, Computer Graphics Programming GKS - The Graphics Standard, Springer Verlag, 1983. 
;;
CS 493;LISP and Prolog programming. Experiments to illustrate search and game playing. Implementation of semantic nets and conceptual graphs. Expert systems in selected areas. Experiments in Natural language processing : ATN, Case frames.
Exercises in Pattern recognition and computer vision.
;;Charniak, E & Riesbeck, C.K. and Mc Dermott, D.V., Artificial Intelligence Programming", Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc., New Jersey, 1980. 
Winston P.H. and Hom, B.K.P., LISP, 2nd ed. Addison Wesley, Reading, 1984. 
Clocksin W.F. and Mellish C.S. Programming in Prolog, 2nd ed., Narosa Pub. House, New Delhi, 1986;;
CS 495;Experiments for acquiring skill in writing concurrent programs. Use of operating system tools. Experiments with MINIX O.S.;;;;
CS 601;Formal models of computation, time and space complexity, Theory of NP-Completeness, Approximability of NP-Hard problems. Introduction to parallel, randomized and on-line algorithms. Complexity classes such as RP, NC, #P, PSPACE. 

;NIL;A. V. Aho , J. E. Hopcroft and J. D. Ullman, The Design and Analysis of Algorithms, Addison-Wesley, 1974. 
T. H. Cormen , C. E. Leiserson and R. L. Rivest, Introduction to Algorithms, MIT Press, 1990 . 
M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson, Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness, Freeman, 1979. 
J. Van Leuween ed, Handbook of Theoretical Computer Science, Vol A., Elsevier, 1990 . 
;;
CS 602;Selected algorithms from areas such as graph and combinatorial algorithms, computational geometry, string processing algorithms, algebraic and number theoretic algorithms, linear programming and combinatorial optimization. 

;NIL;The Design and Analysis of Algorithms, Addison-Wesley, 1974. 
K. Mehlhorn , Data Structures and Algorithms, Vol 2-3,Springer-Verlag, 1984. 
C. Papadimitrou and K. Steiglitz , Combinatorial Optimization, Prentice-Hall, 1982. 
;;
CS 603;Basic topics in computational geometry: Combinatorial geometry of arrangements, Voronoi diagrams, Convex polytopes, algorithms to construct them, geometric search structures, the use of randomization in computational geometry, basic applications to computer graphics etc. 

;NIL;Ketan Mulmuley, Introduction to computational geometry through randomization, Prentice Hall, 1993. 
;;
CS 604;Min-max results. Dilworth"s theorem, Hall"s theorem. 

Menger"s theorem. 

Topics on tournaments. Perfect graphs. The weak perfect graph theorem. 

Ramsey theory. 

Set Systems. Sperner, Erdos-Rado and the Erdos-Ko-Rado theorems. 

Colex orders and the Kruskal-Katona theorem. 

The probabilistic method. Some sample applications of the probabilistic method. Second moment method and applications. 

Matroid theory. The theory of designs. 

Combinatorics and Algorithm design. The Lovasz-theta function and its use in designing algorithms. 

;NIL;K. R. Parthasarathy, Basic Graph Theory, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1994. 
B. Bollobas, Combinatorics, Cambridge University Press, 1986. 
I. Anderson, Combinatorics of finite sets, Oxford University Press, 1987. 
N. Alon and J. H. Spencer, The Probabilistic Method, John Wiley and Sons, 1992. 
;;
CS 606;Fundamental theoretical issues in designing parallel algorithms and architectures. 

Parallel computers based on interconnection networks such as hypercubes, shuffle-exchanges, trees, meshes and butterfly networks. Parallel algorithms for arithmetic, linear algebra, sorting, Fourier Transform, recurrence evaluation, and dense graph problems. Use of graph embedding techniques to compare different networks. 

Shared memory based parallel computers. Algorithms for list ranking, maximal independent set, arithmetic expression evaluation, convex hull problems and others. 

Message routing on multidimensional meshes, Butterfly networks, Hypercubes, Shuffle Exchange networks, Fat-trees and others. Simulation of shared memory on networks. Routing on expander-based networks. 

Limits to parallelizability and P-completeness. 

Thompson grid model for VLSI. Layouts for standard interconnection networks. Lower bound techniques for area and area time-squared tradeoffs. Area-Universal networks. 

;UG course on Algorit;Introduction to Parallel Algorithms and Architectures : Arrays, Trees, Hypercubes. 
F. T. Leighton. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Mateo, California. 1991. 
An Introduction to Parallel Algorithms. Joseph JaJa. Addison Wesley. 1992. 
;;
CS 611; Classical propositional and predicate logic, decision methods, proof calculi, normal forms, Horn clauses. Resolution and other automatic theorem proving techniques. SLD refutation. 

Logic as a programming language, PROLOG, Semantics of logic programs, declarative and procedural semantics. 

Introducing negation in logic programs , Introducing control. 

Parallelism and logic programming, PARLOG, Concurrency. 

Implementation of logic programming environments. ;NIL;J. W. Lloyd, Foundations of Logic Programming, Springer-Verlag Second Edition, 1987. 
C. L. Chang and R.C.T.Lee, Symbolic Logic and Mechanical Theorem Proving, Academic Press, 1973. 
R. A. Kowalski, Logic for Problem Solving, North-Holland, 1979. 
W. Clocksin, and C.S.Mellish, Programming in PROLOG, Springer-Verlag, 1981. 
O"Keefe, Richard The Craft of Prolog, MIT Press, 1991. 
Ait-Kaci, Hassan, Warren"s Abstract Machine, A Tutorial Reconstruction, MIT Press, 1991. ;;
CS 612;Operational Semantics: Compilers and interpreters, labelled transition systems. Semantics of a simple language with loops. 

Denotational Semantics: $lambda$-calculus, domains, continuous functions, fixed points, Semantics of a simple language with loops. 

Axiomatic Semantics: Hoare style logic and weakest preconditions with applications to a subset of PASCAL. Comparison of these semantics using programming language constructs like procedures, jumps, nondeterminism and continuations. 

Reasoning about concurrent features in programming languages using modal logics like temporal logic. 

;NIL;J. de Bakker, Mathematical Theory of Program Correctness, Prentice Hall, 1980. 
R. M. Milne, and C. Strachey, Theory of programming language Semantics, North-Holland, 1976. 
D. Gries, Science of Programming, Springer-Verlag, 1981. 
D. A. Schmidt, Denotational Semantics: A methodology for language development, Allyn and Bacon, Boston, 1986. 
M. J. C. Gordon, Denotational Description of Programming Languages: An Introduction, Springer Verlag, 1979. 
G. Winskel, Formal Semantics of Programming Languages: An Introduction, MIT Press, Cambridge, 1994. 
;;
CS 613;Illustration of Basic concepts in FP using Haskell: Functions as first class objects, Laziness, Datatypes and pattern matching, Types, Classes and overloading, Side-effect free IO. Introduction to Lambda Calculus: Syntax of Lambda terms, Alpha, beta and delta conversions, Normal forms, applicative order and normal order reductions, Church-Rosser theorems, Y combinator and recursion. 

Type Inference: Hindley-Milner type checking algorithm and its extension to handle type classes. 

Implementation of FP Languages: Supercombinators and Lambda Lifting, Graph reduction, Three instruction machine (TIM). Selected topics in Functional Programming: Bird-Meertens Formalism, Abstract Interpretation, Functional Programming using Monads. 

;NIL;P. Hudak, S. Peyton Jones and P. Wadler (eds), Report on the Programming Language Haskell, A Non-strict Purely Functional Language (v 1.2), ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 21(12):37-79, December 1986. 
P. Hudak and J. Fasel. A Gentle Introduction to Haskell. ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 21(12):37-79, December 1986. 
R. Bird and P. Wadler. Introduction to Functional Programming, Prentice Hall, New York, 1988. 
J. R. Hindley and J. P. Seldin. Introduction to Lambda Calculus and Combinators. Cambridge University Press, 1984. 
S. Peyton Jones. The Implementation of Functional Programming languages, Prentice Hall, New York, 1987. 
G. Argo, Improving the Three Instruction Machine, Procs. of FPCA, ACM Press, 1989. 
Assorted papers on Abstract Interpretation, Bird-Meertens Formalism and Monads. 
;;
CS 615;Specification of Sequential and Reactive Programs: Pre-post conditions, Partial and Total Correctness, First Order Logic. Generalization of partial and total correctness specifications, Safety and Liveness Properties, Temporal Logic for specifying safety and Liveness properties. 

Verification of Sequential and Reactive Programs. Hoare Logic. 
Techniques for proving non deterministic programs: Dijkstra"s Weakest pre-condition semantics. Proving non deterministic programs with fairness constraints. Extension of Hoare Logic to deal with languages involving advanced constructs like procedures with parameters, nondeterminism, concurrency, communication and fairness. Axiomatic systems involving First order Logic and Temporal Logic, Techniques for proving safety and liveness properties. 

Computer-Aided Verification: Deductive and model-theoretic approach. Automatic verification of finite state systems. Case study of languages and systems like Z and HOL. 


;NIL;K. R. Apt and Olderog, Program Verification, Springer Verlag, 1991. 
K. R. Apt, Ten Years of Hoare Logic: A Survey- part I and II, ACM TOPLAS, 1981 and TCS 1984. 
S. Alagic and M. Arbib, Design of Well Structured and Correct Programs, Springer Verlag, 1978. 
H. Barringer, Survey of verification Methods for Parallel Programs, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1985. 
A. Pnueli, and Z. Manna , Temporal Logic of Reactive and Concurrent Systems, Springer Verlag, 1992. 
J. Loeck, and K. Sieber , Foundations of Program Verification, John Wiley, 1984. 
Recent research papers on Automatic Verification of Finite State Systems. 
;;
CS 616;Parallelizing Compilers - motivation and overview, structure of a parallelizing compiler; review of code optimization techniques in compilers for sequential machines. 

Parallelism detection - data dependence, direction vectors, loop carried and loop independent dependences; tests for data dependence and their applicability, construction of data dependence graph. 

Control dependence and control dependence graph. 

Restructuring transformations and automatic extraction of parallelism; representation of iteration spaces of multiply nested loops; loop based transformations such as loop distribution, loop coalescing, loop inter-change and cycle shrinking transformation. 

Introduction to machine models and associated algorithms for parallel code generation and task graph construction. 

Interprocedural analysis - aliasing information, summary data flow analysis, interprocedural constant propagation, interprocedural data dependence analysis and parallelisation of call statements. 

Partitioning and Scheduling of a task graph; models for communication, partitioning and scheduling algorithms, dynamic scheduling algorithms, target code generation. 

Case studies of contemporary parallelising compiler efforts. 

;UG compilers course,;M. J. Wolfe, Optimizing Supercompilers for supercomputers ,MIT Press, 1989. 
V. Sarkar, Partitioning and Scheduling Parallel Programs for Execution on Multiprocessors, MIT Press, 1989. 
U. Banerjee, Dependence Analysis for Supercomputing, Norwell, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1988. 
Selected Papers from Leading Journals and Conference Proceedings 
;;
CS 621;Knowledge Representation: The First Order Predicate Logic, Production Systems, Semantic Nets, Frames and Scripts Formalisms. 

Resolution in Predicate Logic, Unification, Strategies for Resolution by Refutation. 

Knowledge Acquisition and learning: Learning from examples and analogy, Rote learning, Neural Learning, Integrated Approach. ;Undergraduate course;E. Charniak, et.al., Introduction to Artificial Intelligence, Addison Wesley, 1985. 
P. H. Winston, Artificial Intelligence, Addison Wesley, 1993. 
E. Rich and K. Knight, Artificial Intelligence, Addison Wesley, 1990. 
R. Honavar and E. Uhr, Artificial Intelligence and Neural Networks, Academic Press, 1992. 
F. Hayes Roth et.al., Building Expert Systems, Addison Wesley, 1983. 
P. R. Cohen,et.al., The Handbook of Artificial Intelligence, Vol.1,2 and 3, Kaufman Inc.,1982. 
B. K. P. Horn, Robot Vision, MIT Press, 1985. 
J. Carbonell, Machine Learning paradigms and Methods, MIT Press, 1990. 
Journals- Artificial Intelligence, AI Magazine, IEEE Expert, Machine Learning, Computer Vision Image Processing and Graphics, IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks. ;;
CS 622;Image models: geometry, color, acquisition, representation. 

Early Vision: Primal sketch, Filtering, Edge operators. 

Intermediate Vision: Boundary completion methods, Segmentation and region growing. 

High Level Vision: Knowledge representation, inference, and Goal Achievement in Computer Vision. 

Techniques: Stereo, Texture, Shape from Shading, Motion, Pyramid paradigms. 

;Exposure to Undergra;A. Low, Introductory Computer Vision and Image Processing, McGraw-Hill, 1991. 
D. Ballard and C. Brown, Computer Vision, Prentice Hall, 1982. 
B. K. P. Horn, Robot Vision, MIT Press, 1985. 
E. Grimson, From Images to Surfaces, MIT Press, 1986. 
;;
CS 623;Motivation; limitations of symbolic approach to machine intelligence Perceptrons; training; convergence theorem; linear separability Multilayer perceptron; Backpropagation; Boltzmann machine and simulated annealing Hopfield net; energy; stability; capacity; Application to optimization problems Unsupervised learning; Adaptive Resonance Theory; Kohonen network Capabilities of multilayer perceptrons; complexity issues; importance of Kolmogorov complexity; Probably Approximately Correct learning and neural networks Hybrid systems; importance of integrating symbolic and connectionist systems; connectionist expert systems 

;NIL;J. Anderson et. al., Neuro computing Vol 1 and Vol 2, MIT Press, 1986 and 1988. 
Mclleland and Rumelhart, Parallel and Distributed Processing, Vol 1 , Vol 2 and Vol 3, MIT Press, 1986-88 
P.D. Wassermann, Neural Computing Theory and Practice, Van Nostrand Publishers, 1989. 
Papers from selected journals like IEEE Neural Networks, Neural Networks, Machine Learning, Neural Computation, Journal of Complexity 
;;
CS 624;Introduction to pattern recognition and applications to OCR, speech recognition, fingerprints, signatures etc. Commercial importance of applications. 

Introduction to Statistical, Neural and Structural Approaches. 

Statistical Pattern Recognition: Patterns and classification, discriminant functions, Bayes decision rule, nearest neighbour rule, probability of error. 

Linear discriminant functions: Perceptrons and training, LMSE approaches. 

Unsupervised learning and clustering. Feature extraction. 

Neural Approach: Introduction to artificial neural networks, feed forward networks, delta rule and back propagation, Hopfield networks and unsupervised learning, Adaptive resonance architectures, related techniques. Pattern associators and content addressable memories, hardware realizations. 

Syntactic pattern recognition: Formal languages and grammars Pattern grammars and higher dimensional grammars, Parsing, automata realizations, stochastic grammars, Grammatical Inference, computational learning theory, Valiant"s framework. 

;NIL;R. J. Schalkoff, Pattern Recognition: Statistical, Structural and Neural Approaches, Wiley, 1992. 
R. O. Duda and P. E. Hart, Pattern Classification and Scene Analysis, Wiley, New York, 1973. 
L. Miclet, Structural Methods in Pattern Recognition North Oxford Academic, London, 1986. 
;;
CS 632;Object Oriented Databases: Persistent Programming Languages, Object Identity and its implementation, Clustering, Indexing, Client Server Object Bases, Cache Coherence. 

Parallel Databases: Parallel Architectures, performance measures, shared nothing/shared disk/shared memory based architectures, Data partitioning, Intra-operator parallelism, Pipelining, Scheduling, Load balancing, query optimization with Volcano as a case study. 

Distributed Databases: Query processing, semi-joins, query optimization, Concurrency control Heterogeneity issues. 

Advanced Transaction Models: Savepoints, Sagas, Nested Transactions, Multi Level Transactions. 

Recovery: Multi-level recovery, Shared disk systems, Distributed systems 2PC, 3PC, replication and hot spares. 

Recursive query processing: Top-down and bottom-up evaluation, Magic optimization 

;CS 683;Database System Concepts, Korth and Silberschatz, Second Edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 1991. 
Fundamentals of Database Systems, R. Elmasri and S. Navathe, Benjamin Cummings,Second Edition, 1994. 
Database Transaction Models for Advanced Applications, Ahmed K. Elmagarmid (ed.), Morgan Kaufmann, 1993. 
Transaction Processing, Concepts and Techniques, J. Gray and A. Reuter, Morgan Kauffman, 1994. 
Introduction to Object Oriented Databases, Won Kim, MIT Press, 1989. 
Readings in Object Oriented Database Systems, S. Zdonik and D. Maier, First Edition, Morgan Kauffman, 1990. 
Readings in Database Systems, M. Stonebraker, Second Edition, Morgan Kauffman, 1993. 
Distributed Databases Principles and Systems, S. Ceri and G. Pelaggati, McGraw Hill, 1985. 
Selected research papers from various journals and conferences. 
;;
CS 633;Introduction to Relational Model, Relational Algebra, Storage Structures, Indexing, Query Processing Algorithms, External Sorting, Query Optimization, Buffer Management, Concurrency Control, Recovery. ;NIL;Database System Concepts, Second Edition, Tata Mc-Graw Hill, Hank Korth and Abraham Silberschatz, 1991. 
Fundamentals of Database Systems, Second Edition, Benjamin Cummings, Ramez Elmasri and Shamkant Navathe, 1994. 
Selected Papers from Leading Journals and Conference Proceedings. 
;;
CS 641;Introduction to Data Communications and Computer Networking, OSI reference model, Network Protocols, Communications Software Architecture, Medium Access Control Protocols, Network Access Protocols, Internetworking, Network Software Design. 

;Exposure to UG opera;A. S. Tanenbaum, Computer Networks, Prentice Hall, Second Edition, 1993. 
D. E. Comer, Internetworking with TCP/IP: Principles, Protocols and Architecture, Prentice Hall, 1988. 
Marshall T. Rose, The Open Book -- A practical Perspective in OSI, Prentice Hall, 1990 
W. Richard Stevens, UNIX Network Programming, Prentice Hall, 1991. 
D. Bertsekas and R. Callagher, Data Networks, Prentice Hall, Second Edition, 1992. 
W. Stallings, Networking Standards: A Guide to OSI, ISDN, LAN and WAN Protocols, Addison Wesley, 1993. 
;;
MM 606;Nucleation and formation of macroscopic defects, defect characterization techniques; Crystal growth, point defects, dislocation interelationships in elemental and compound semiconductors; diffusion and oxidation, radiation-induced defects, thermal and laser annealing of ion implantation and neutron damage; correlation of atomic structure with the electronic properties of dislocation, properties of semiconductor grain boundaries in polycrystralline materials used in active and passive electronic devices. ;;K.V.Ravi, Imperfections & impurities in semiconductor silicon, John Wiley, New York, 1981. 
W.R.Runyan, Semiconductor measurements and instrumentation. McGraw Hill, New York, 1975. ;;
CS 642;Introduction to distributed computing. Distribution of data and control: Clock synchronization, distributed termination problem, load distribution, distributed elections, agreement problem. Deadlocks in distributed systems, Introduction to fault-tolerant computing. 

High level language supports for distributed computing: message passing primitives, atomic actions, remote procedure call mechanisms. 

Implementation of these features. Case study of some languages like OCCAM II, Linda. 

Formal development and verification of distributed algorithms. 
;NIL;G. F. Colouris, and J. Dollimore, Distributed Systems: Concepts and design, Addision Wesley, 1988. 
S. Mullender (Ed.), Distributed Systems, Addision Wesley, 1989. 
P. L. McEntre, et al., Distributed Computing: Concepts and Implementations, IEEE Press 1984. 
Y. Parkar(Ed) Distributed Computer Systems, Academic Press, 1983. 
B. W. Lampson (ed) Distributed Systems: Architecture and Applications: An Advance Course, Springer-Verlag, 1981. 
B. Simon and A. Spector (Eds.), Fault-tolerant distributed computing, Springer 1990. 
Research papers from some current journals. 
;;
CS 644;Computer Networks Performance Analysis of Balanced HDLC Procedures; Delay and Blocking Performances of Dual Bus and Dual Ring MAN"s; Analysis of Polling Systems; Analysis of Window Flow Control Mechanisms; Input Buffer Limiting for Congestion Control; Flow Models, Optimal Routing and Topological Design; Rate Control and Rate Adjustment Schemes; Packet Switch Interconnection Fabrics and their performance analysis. 
;CS 661;M. Schwartz, Telecommunications Network Protocols, Modelling and Analysis, Addison Wesley, 1987. 
D. Bertsekas and R. Gallaghar, Data Networks, Prentice Hall, 1991. 
J. L. Hammond, O"Reilly, J. P. Peter, Performance Analysis Of Local Computer Networks, Addison Wesley, 1986. 
J. F. Hayes, Modelling and Analysis Of Computer Communication Networks, Plenum Press,1984. 
;;
CS 682;Software life cycle -- important steps and effort distribution. Aspects of estimation and scheduling. 

Software evaluation techniques-modular design : coupling and cohesion, Software and complexity measures. Issues in software reliability. 

System Analysis: Requirement analysis. Specification languages. 

Feasibility analysis. File and data structure design, Systems analysis tools. 

Software design methodologies, Data flow and Data Structure oriented design strategies. Software development, coding, verification, and integration. Issues in project management-team structure, scheduling, software quality assurance. 

Object Oriented methodology: object orineted paradigm, OO analysis and design, examples of methodolgies (e.g., Rumbaugh"s OMT). 

;Exposure to system p;R. S. Pressman, Software Engineering - A Practioner"s Approach,3rd Edition, McGrawHill,1992. 
J. Martin, Rapid Application Development, Maxwell MacMillan, 1991. 
B. Meyer, Object Oriented Software Construction, Prentice Hall, 1988. 
G. G. Schulmeyer, Zero Defect Software, McGraw-Hill, 1992. 
J. Rumbaugh et. al., Object Oriented Modeling and Design, Prentice Hall,1991. 
;;
CS 683;Overview and history of computing. Architectural Classification schemes. 

High performance computing, overview and performance quantification criteria, limits on performance Design of high performance architecture, parallel vs. 

pipeline architectures. 

Pipeline processing. Theory of pipeline scheduling and implementation. Hazards in Pipeline processors. Hazard detection and resolution techniques. Static and dynamic schedules. Evolution of RISC ISAs and pipeline hazards. 

Interconnection Networks. 

Topics of current research in High performance computing. 

;NIL;K. Hwang and F. A. Briggs, " Computer Architecture and Parallel Processing, McGraw-Hill, 1984. 
M. R. Bhujade : Lecture Notes in Parallel computing, CSE, IIT Bombay 1990. 
M. R. Bhujade, Pipeline and SIMD Processing, Wiley Eastern, 1995. 
Research Papers from the current literature. ;;
CS 684;1. Introduction : data, information and knowledge: flow of data amongst individuals and organisation importance of information in todays world: representation of information: files records and fields. 

2. Data manager: basic tasks of data capture. validation classification, storage, retrieval and maintenance; modeling using data flow diagrams: problem areas in manual systems including those in information dissemination, delays in movement, lack of consolidated metadata/ metainformation. 

3. Information Technology: Computer Systems, storage devices office automation technologies, computer networks and communications, software systems, packed software, application software, database system, 4th generation languages. 

4. Buildings information system: Life cycle, feasibility and cost/benefit analysis, requirements specification, design and implementation, user acceptance, CASE tools. 

;NIL;N. L. Sarda, Structured COBOL programming with Business Application. Pitamber Publ. Co. New Delhi 1991 
D. H. Sanders, Computer Today, McGraw-Hill 1988 
J. A. Senn, Analysis and Design of Information Systems. McGraw-Hill 1989 
;;
CS 685;3D Object Representation. Visible Surface Algorithms. 

Curves and Surfaces in Computer Graphics. 

Introduction to Ray Tracing and Radiosity methods. 

Anti-aliasing, Shadow generation, Texture mapping, Effects, Fractals, Image Coding, Color. 

;Introductory compute;James Foley, Andries van Dam, Steve Feiner and John Hugues, Computer Graphics: Principles and Practice, Second Edition, Addison Wesley, 1990. 
Alan Watt and Mark Watt, Advanced Animation and Rendering Techniques: Theory and Practise, Addison Wesley, 1992. 
G. Farin, Curves and Surfaces in Geometric Aided Design, Academic Press, 1993. 
James Foley, Andries van Dam, Steve Feiner and John Hugues, Computer Graphics: Principles and Practice, Second Edition, Addison Wesley, 1990. 
Alan Watt and Mark Watt, Advanced Animation and Rendering Techniques: Theory and Practise, Addison Wesley, 1992. 
G. Farin, Curves and Surfaces in Geometric Aided Design, Academic Press, 1993. 
;;
CS 695;Stochastic Processes and their classification; Markov chains, Transient and long run analysis of Markov chains; Phase dependent stochastic processes; Embedded Markov chains analysis; Renewal and renewal reward processes; Selected case studies. 

;NIL;L. Kleinrock, Queueing Systems, Vol.I Theory, John Wiley, 1975. 
M. K. Molloy, Fundamentals Of Performance Modelling, Macmillan, 1989. 
K. Kant, Introduction To Computer System Performance Evaluation, McGraw-Hill, 1992. 
;;
CS 696;Introduction to code optimisation. Classical theory of data flow analysis. Bi-directional data flows. Unified algorithms for data flow analysis. A generalised theory of data flow analysis. Program representation for optimisation - SSA form, etc. 

Efficient code generation for expressions. Code generator generators (CGGs). Code generation for pipelined machines. Register allocation techniques. 

Concurrentisation and vectorisation of programs. 

(Note : Some topics may be added/deleted to suit specific offerings of the course.) 

;Exposure to UG cours;Research Papers from reputed journals;;
MM 613;Fracture Criteria, Introduction to linear elastic fracture mechanics, Analysis of simple crack problems. Nucleation and propagation of cracks. Correlation between microstructure and fracture behaviour in different materials. Mechanisms of fracture. Evaluation of fracture toughness. Crack behaviour in elastic plastic materials. Effect of strain rate, environments temperature, irradiation etc. on fracture behaviour of materials. 
Conventional approach to fatigue crack growth in reactive environments static or cyclic loading. Applications of fracture mechanics to materials selection, alloy design, design of structures and failure analysis. 

;;S.T.Rolfe and J.M.Barsom, Fracture and Fatigue control in structures, Prentice Hall, 1972. 
David and Bruck, "Elementary Engineering Fracture Mechanics", Norelho, 1975. 
A.Foroulis, Environment Sensitive Fracture of Engineering Materials, ed. AIME, Warrandale Pa, 1979. 
;;
CS 697;Motivation for distributed operating systems. Design issues in distributed operating systems. 

Design of distributed file systems -- transparency and scalability. The reliability hierarchy -- recovery, tolerance and resiliency. Resiliency techniques in distributed systems. 

Protection structures in distributed systems. Capabilities in hardware and software. Security concerns in distributed systems. Security models. Kerberos authentication system. 

Algorithms for distributed control -- mutual exclusion, deadlock handling, termination detection. 

(Note : Some topics may be added/deleted to suit specific offerings of the course) 

;Exposure to UG cours;M. Singhal, N. Shivaratri : Advanced concepts in operating systems, McGraw Hill, 1994. 
A. S. Tanenbaum : Modern operating systems, Prentice Hall, 1993. 
Research papers from selected journals. 
;;
CS 699;Overview of SQL2; Object Oriented Paradigm; Object Oriented Database Systems: concepts, query languages; Object Oriented Database Management Systems Case Study and illustrative applications; Object Relational Systems with Illustra as Case Study. 

Emerging SQL3 standards, Deductive and knowledge based systems, active databases and their applications. Temporal database systems: modelling of time, extensions to SQL. Overview of distributed and client server databases. 

;NIL;R. T. Snodgrass (ed), The TSQL2 Temporal Query Language, Kluwer Academic, 1995. 
K. Parsaye, M. Chignell, S. Khoshafian and H. Wong, Intelligent Databases, Wiley, 1989. 
R. G. G. Cattell, Object Data Management, Addison Wesley, 1991. 
F. Bancilhon, C. Delobel, P. Kanellakis, Building an Object Oriented Database System -- The Story of O2,Morgan Kauffman Publishers, 1992. 
Fundamentals of Database Systems, R. Elmasri and S. Navathe, Benjamin Cummings, Second Edition, 1994. 
Distributed Databases Principles and Systems, S. Ceri and G. Pelaggati, McGraw Hill, 1985. 
Recent research papers from various journals and conferences. 
;;
MM 614;Magnetic order, Ferro-, Ferri-, Antiferro-magnetic materials; exchange interaction, magnetic anistropy and magnetostriction. 
Magnetic domains and B-H loop, hard and soft magnetic materials. Thin magnetic films. Conventional and rare earth permanent magnets. 

Applications at low and high frequencies. 

Experimental results on superconductivity, Type I and II superconductors, occurrence of low and high Tc, superconductivity. Correlation between Tc, Jc and Hc. Dependence of Jc on microstructure and composition. Structural aspects. 

Theoretical approaches. Applications and manufacturing techniques. 

;;C.M.Srivastava, C.Srinivasan "Science of Engineering Materials", Wiley Eastern Ltd., New Delhi, 1987. 
Progress in High Temperature Super conducltivity Vol.1-3 (1987) Vol.5-16 (1988), World Scientific, Singapore. 
A.C.Rose-Ines, and E.H.Rhoderick, "Introduction to superconductivity", Pergamon Press, Oxford 1969. 
B.Lax and K.J.Button, "Microwave Ferrites and Ferrimagnetics", McGraw-Hill, New York ,1962. 
;;
CS 701;Introduction to Unix, Unix tools (shell programming, grep, awk, tar, compress, etc), programming tools (make, source code control, debuggers), language tools (lex, yacc), database querying using SQL, graphical user interface programming using Tcl/TK, World Wide Web, document processing using Latex, introduction to Macintosh environment.


;NIL;;;
ID 627;In Introduction to basic elements and concepts of visual design: line, texture, colour, form balance, proportion, size, shape, mass, unity and variety. Spatial relationship and compositions in 2 and 3 dimensional space, 2 dimensional radii manipulation and form transition. Exercises in graphic composition and layout. The use of grids in graphic composition. ;;R.G. Scott,Design Fundamentals, McGraw Hill 1951. 
E.A. Huwit, Design a Search for Essential. International Textbook Company 1967 
J. Karo, Graphic Design Problems, Methods. Solution (VNR) 1975 
R.A. Ballinger, Layout and Graphic Design (VN) 1970. 
;;
ID 629; Techniques of pencil drawing through elementary exercises, to coordinate eye, hand and body movements to acquire necessay control over the line drawing; introduction to object drawing. Theory of perspecive, one point and two point perspective; OR Introduction to workshop technology (for Architects only).Typography, Introduction and exercise.;;Doblin Jay, New System for Designers Whitney N.Y. 1956. 
Begeman M.L., Manufacturing Pocesses,
8th ed. John Wiley, New York, 1987.
Champman W.A. J., Workshop Technology Vol. I, II, III, Oxford/IBH Pub., New Delhi, 1975. 
;;
ID 631; Understanding of the factors that directly or indirectly influence the context and the products. Group assignments on assessing relevance of available products with respect to the context. 
Understanding of problem areas and the limitations. Familizariation studies and pogramming for detailed investigation of context. 

Developing questionnaires, interviewing users and selecting suitable techniques to study use behaviour and reactions, interviewing and observing user and photographic studies of products in use. 

Understanding of market demands and manufacturing constraints. 

Documenting and interpreting data and formulating conclusions. Role of creativity in understanding of latent needs. Comparative analytical studies in other creative fields. Product in product design. 
;;Asimow Morris, Introduction to Design, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1962. 
Jones J.C., Design methods: Seeds of Human futures, Wiley Interscience, London,1970. 
;;
ID 632;Human being in man made world, Gross human anatomy, Anthopometry, static and dynamic, Muscles and work physiology,Static and dynamic work including maximum capacity Bio-mechanics Envionmental condition including thermal, illlumination, noise and vibration. 
Biological transducers and nervous system including their limitations. 

Controls and displays Psycho physiological aspects of design. 

Research techniques in Ergonomic data generation, interpretation and application of statistical methods. Case analysis. 

Project work involving Ergonomic design research for product systems. 
;;;;
ID 633;The concept of Industrial Design starting from the time of the Great Exhibition leading to the Bauhaus and after, work of Bauhaus, history of design profession in Europe and America. 
A survey of major developments of 20th Century painting, sculpture and architecture. Changing cultural pattern and its influence on the above medium. Influence of television on films. Urbanization and understanding of contemporary urban forms. 

;;;;
ID 634;Study of geometry of elements in products and its application in object drawing. Product presentation in various media like pencil, ink, and colour, Presenting thoughts and ideas in design through sketches, perspective and exploded views. Presentation of product design concepts through simplified graphic presentation. Introduction to typefaces, Typography and printing-Introduction to colour photography. ;;Doblin Jay: Perspective: A New System for Designers, Whitney N.Y. 1956. 
Herdeg: Graphics Diagrams, Graphics press, l976. 
Langford, Advance Photography Focal Press, 1974. 
;;
ID 636;The emphasis of the course is on individually planned design projects in different product areas. Selection of these projects is based on consideration like close human interaction with product, wide range or requirements of different users and possibilities of formal and structural innovations. Projects end with a comprehensive presentation through working/mock-up models, design drawing and a report. This project work is supported by theoretical information and short supporting asssignment in following topics: Role of creativity in problem solving, study of inhibitions, conformity and vertical thinking; Assignments on using techniques like brain storming, synectics to develop creative attitude and open mind. 
The development of modern design methods from craft evolution. 

Detailed discussion on stages in design process. Complimentary nature of systematic and creative thinking in various stages of design proceses. Discussion on nature of synthesis. 

Methodology for visual analysis of products. Principles of value analysis, use, esteem, time and exchange values and definition of function. 

;;Jones J.C.: Design methods, Interscience 1970. 
Buhl H.R.: Creative Engineering Design, Iowa State Univ. Pres 1960. 
Hill Percy H. : The Science of Engineering Design, Holt, Rinehart and Winston Inc. 1970. 
de Bono Edward: Lateral Thinking, Penguin 1972. 
William J.J. Gordon: Synectics, Collie Books 1968. ;;
ID 638;Function of control and display elements dials, knobs, push buttons, handles, and electronic displays. Investigations and study of visual, functional and ergonomical requirements of control and display elements. Legibility of display elements, Character of different type-faces and their readability. Printing and transfer techniques. Product graphics. Study of different textures and patterns. Area, volume and poportion. Order and system. 
Individually planned design projects involving research analysis and design of control and display panels. 
;;W.E. Woodson, Human Engineering Guide for equipment Designers, University of California 1960. 
Henry Dreyfus, Measure of Man, Whitney N.Y. 1960. 
Crosby, Fletcher & Forbes, A Sign System Manual, Studio Vista Ltd 1970. 
W.H. Mayall, Machines & Perception in Industrial Design, Studio Vista/Reinhold 1968. 
;;
ID 641;Corporate strategyfor product planning, Management thinking on new products, Seeing product as part of the image of the company,Moving into future, Defining companies business. Technology transfer problems.SWOT analysis, Analysis of strength,weakness, opportunities and threat Brief introduction to assessing of companies financial performance.Study of product life cycle, Monitoring of sale and competition, when to introduce new products.Assessing market potentials for new products, Market research, Consumer research and its demographic aspects, Setting up a questonnaire for these aspects.Establishing market segments and their dimensions.Assessing competitors share and locating direct and indirect sources to understand this.Assessing competitors marketing approach and strategies.Developing a strategy to introduce new products, Using market gaps as competitive edge, Cost considerations and profitability of new products, Developing a product plan and product mix, Price policy, positioning the company, product positioning, planning for future position.Evolving a design brief by interlinking with market/product plan.Seeing product design as a part of a scheme to develop brand image, house style,marketing strategy and corporate image.Discriminating product range from each other and from competitor"s range.Developing product specifications for different products within the range.Market communication, Launching the product, Monitoring the market performance. ;;Philips Kotler, Marketing, Agarwal I., Seminars on Product Planning Seminar Paper 
Levit Theodore, Marketing Imagination 
;;
ID 644;Message, Media, Audience, Critics, Promoters etc. as a system.


Invited seminars by outside experts and professionals

;;;;
ID 649;Exploration and study of formal elements to develop visual awareness, imagination and creative insight. Form elements in the context of product design, 2 & 3 dimensional radii manipulation; joints, grooves and openings, 2 & 3 dimensional form transition, Creative form synthesis. 
Introduction to colour and colour as element of design. Colour classification and dimensions of colour: hue, value and chroma relationships. Colour dynamics and interaction of colours. Colour meaning and traditions. Psychological use of colours.Colour in nature. Colour & form relationships. 

;;Itten J. Elements of Colour 
Sloane Patricia: Colour: Basic principles & New Directions, Studio Vista.;;
ID 650;Exploration of potential of various materials, creative manipulation of materials, tools and techniques for visual invention. Formal analysis and visual refinement of form. 
Form in nature, generation of product forms with analogies from nature. 

Form & Structure. 

The psychological use of colours. 

Form and colour to accentuate and destroy 3-D perception. 

The use of colour in products and product environments , right and colour . Visual influence of colour on space, colour specification systems for various applications. 

;;;;
ID 651;Study of "Form" based on "metaphors". Study of various bases for creative visualisations like fantasy, cultural connotations in languages, and bionics.
Ornamentation, craft forms, and craft experience.
Form concept in styling. Forms of automobiles. Use of computers for new form generations.
;;Yanagi Soetsu, Unknown Craftman - A Japanese Insight into Beauty, Kodamsha International Ltd., Tokyo, 1984. 
;;
ID 653;Detailing in plastic products, while using processes like injection moulding, vacuum moulding, compression moulding, F.R. P. moulding, Detailing for fabricated products in sheet metal, steel tubes and angles, aluminium sheets and extruded sections, detailing while using fabric materials, foam and other cushions, leather and cloth in combination with materials like wood and metal. ;;Feirer, Cabinet making and mill work, Bennet Co. 
Robert Schatff, Complete book of wood finishing, Macgraw Hill. 
Kent R., Van Horn, Aluminium fabrication and finishing Vol. III 
I.P. Roseman, Leather working, Dryad Press 
Ronald D. Berk, Plastic Product Design, Van Nostrand. 
Beadle J.D. Plastics Vol. 1, Morgan Gramfiam, 1970. 
Kurt Rowland, the Development of Shape. Looking and seeing 2. 
;;
ID 655;Study of systematic methods to understand design problems, Developing methods to analyse product design problems, formulating problem statements as well as developing and using methods to generate creative responses. 
Study of design process and its stages.Understanding shifts between analytical and creative phases in different stages of designing. 

The emphasis is on project work dealing with survey, analysis and development of design methods for product design tasks. 

;;Jones, J.C., Design Methods-Seeds of human future. Wiley Inter-science, London, 1970. 
Moore, G.T. Ed, Emerging Methods in Environmental Design and Planning, MIT Press, Cambridge, 1970. Journals: 
Design Methods and Theories, Journal of the DMG. 
;;
ID 657; Electrophysiology and its application in product design, Use of eye movement recorder and Eletro-occulography in visual analysis of product and design; Ergonomics of human energy expenditure and its application; Research oriented work:-Product analysis Short paper communication 
;;K.F.H. Murrell, Ergonomics, Man and his working environment. 
P.O. Astrand and K. Rodahl, Text of work physiology, 
C.H. Best and N.S. Taylor, The Physiological basis of Medical Practice. 
K.L. Andersen, Fundamental of Exercise Testing. 
Grays Anatomy 
J. Applied Ergonomics 
J. Ergonomics 
Industrial Design Magazine 
W.E. Woodson, Human Factor Design Handbook,McGraw Hill,New York,1981.
Williams P.L., M. Dyson, ed. Gray"s Anatomy 37th. edition, ELBS/Churchill Livingstone, 1992 ;;
ID 659;The course discusses semantic and structural aspects of visual input, through series of project assignments. Using human information processing capabilities, the course looks back towards formal concepts such as visual complexity, visual interest and recall of forms. 
The first part covers topics such as spatio-temporal relationships in visual elements and its role in visual structure, forms of visual relationships, and its role in controlling visual complexity, interest and identity. Assignments are also based on application of Information theory to visual information. 

The second part discusses the role of characteristic features in object/form recognition and natural categorization process. Concepts of prototypicality and variations are discussed through assignments. 

;;Gibson, E.J. Principles of Perceptual Learning and Development.Appleton, 1966. 
Posner M. I. & Keele S. W., On the Genesis of Abstract Idea. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1968, 77, 353-363. 
Rips L.J., Schoben E.J. & Smith E.F., Semantic Distance and the Verification of Semantic Relations. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behaviour, 1975, l4, 665-681. 
Rosch, Mervis, Gray, Johnson & Boyes-Braem, Basis Objects in Natural Categories.Cognitive Psychology, 8, 383-435. 
Posner M.I. Abstraction and the Process of Recognition, in Bower and Spence Eds, The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, New York: Academic Press, 1969, Vol. 3,44-96. 
;;
VC 601;Advanced study of visual elements and principles-line, plane, shape, form, pattern, texture, gradation, colour, symmetry, order balance, unity, contrast, mass and proportion. Spatial relationships and compositions in 2 and 3 dimensional space,Exercises on visual composition and layout.The use of girds in visual composition. 
Priniples of visual dynamics and its analysis in 2 D. Concepts of visual design, visual structure and visual interest, visual analysis and refinement of visual representations. Analysis of Aesthetics-the structure of appearance. Form in nature, Generation of visual images with analogies from nature. Relationship of colour and form. The use of colours. Composition with colour. Colour specification system for various applications the synthetic nature of colour. 

;;Hoffman Armin, Graphic Design manna Verlag Arthur Niggli AG, 1965. 
Proctor R.M., The Principles of Pattern, Van Nostrand Reinhold. ;;
VC 602;Advanced techniques of illustration, advanced techniques of air brush and rendering.Techniques of video and animation.Introduction of computer graphics-data structure for strong, building and retrieving images will be examined and various representational techniques for images studies. Study of graphic information processing, graphs, charts, maps etc. ;;Leon Amiel Pmiel Publishers Inc. NY, 1980. 
Schmid & Schmid, Handbook of Graphic Presentation, Roland Press, 1979. 
;;
VC 603;Techniques of representation to acquire the necessary skill to
represent visual  images. Exercise on converting visual images into  2
D representation.  Exercises on the use of pencil, sketch pen, painting
brushes, air brushes and other  drawing aids. Techniques of using
colour and colour papers.  Exposure to a variety of media.

Introduction to fundamentals of different media-drawing,illustration,
rendering, photography, animation, video, audio visual and films.

Techniques of illustration rendering and cartooning using different
drawing tools like pencil, sketch pen marker, air brush, brush, water
colour, oil colours, paper and montage. Techniques of Audio-visual
methods of audio visual presentation.
;;Dalley Terence, The Complete Guide to illustration & Design, Phaidon, 1980;;
VC 604;Colour photography, communicating ideas through photography. Study of Photographic images, documentary and reportorial techniques emphasis on experimental manipulation. The study of the chemistry, optics and techniques of photography as a means of understanding and controlling the process of photography for visual expression. Techniques of using studio camera. Styles of lighting, set-building and design. Process Practice of photographic illustration. Various trends in photography. 
Photography as applied to various factors like different locations, time, materials and environment. 

;;Langford Michael, Advanced Photography The Focal Press. London 1977 
Hedgeco John, The air of Colour Photography, Mitchel Beazley 1981. 
;;
VC 605;Basic of photography. Techniques of photography-camera and dark room. 
Learning to use camera and lighting for studio photography. 

Techniques of slide making. 

;;Hedgeco John, The Photographer handbook, Ebony Press, 1977. 
;;
VC 606;Application of design methods to complex design tasks-study of analytical synthetic and evaluative techniques. Detailed discussion on stages in design process. Nature of systematic and creative thinking in various stages of design process. Methodologies for analysis of various problems. Study of graph techniques, diagrammatic analysis, taxonomic organisational methods, systems analysis semantic differential for analysis of physiopsychological-problems. Morphological analysis. The emphasis is on individually planned design projects in different visual areas and appropriate application of design methods. ;;Jlee Paul, Notebooks Vol. l, The Thinking Eye, Lund Humphries 
Johes J.C,. Design Methods, Inter Science 1970 
;;
VC 607;Understanding of the factors that directly or indirectly influence the visual design problem. Theory and application of problem structuring methods used in design. Design methodology-Study in the phases of process from analysis through synthesis and evaluation. Program for investigation of problem. Developing questionnaires, interviewing users and selection of sluitable techniques to study user behaviours and reactions. Understanding of user demands and manufacturing constraints. Documenting, and interpreting of data and formulating conclusions. Role of creativity-role playing brain storming, metamorphic thinking and other methods of idea generation. Comparative study in other creative fields. ;;Gyorgy Kepes, Education of Vision, Studio Vista, 1965. 
Mckim Robert H., Experiences in Visual Thinking Brooks/Cole Publishing Co. 1980. ;;
VC 609;A historical analysis of painting, sculpture and architecture and other forms of visual communications upto modern times with emphasis on the changing patterns of techniques, thinking and its influence on society. A survey of major developments of 20th century paintings, sculpture and architecture. A historical analysis of visual communications in the Indian context. Discussions on major developments and styles. Design and its influence on society. Discussions on the function of aesthetics. Study of the social political and cultural environment in which we live to find out where we stand and how to proceed ahead. Design in the context of India. Analysis of visual communications in India. ;;Baynes Ken, Industrial Design & the Community, Lund Humphries 1978. 
Baynes Ken, Art in Society Lund Humphries 1975. Alain Danielon, Hindu Polytheism Routledge Kegan, Paul. ;;
VC 610;A study of printing technology. Introduction to all the major processes of printing. Attention is drawn to the influence of printing process on design. Discussions on the constraints and possibilities with each of the printing process. An outline of paper technology. Study of properties, finishes, features and uses of different types papers available in the country. An introduction to printing and ink technology. Limitations and specific advantages of these are studied. 
Study of production methods of books, new papers magazines etc. Study of packaging using different materials. New trends and developments in communications technology. 

;;Craig James, Production for the Graphic Designer, watson-Guptill Publication N.Y. 1974. 
K.F. Hird, Paste up for Graphic Art Production, Prentice hall, N.J. 
;;
VC 611;Study of various letter forms. Analysis of basic categories. 
Theoretical and applicable principles of letter forms. Expressing with different letter forms. A detailed study of layout, grids. 

Experiments in 2 D composition. Techniques of art work. Typography studies leading to creation of new faces. Typography as applied to different situations like signage, films, children books, directories etc. 

;;Ruegg Ruedi & Frohlich Godi, Basic Typography ABC Edition, Zurich 1972 Schmid Helmut, Typography Today Seibundo Shinkosha 1980 
Gosby, Fletcher, Forbes; A Signage System Manual, Studio Vista. 
Muller Brockmann J., Grid Systems Verlag Arthur Niggli. 
;;
VC 614;Analysis of forms of art (theatre, film, literature, dance, painting, sculpture, architecture) from the point of aesthetics, structure, meaning and creativity. Tracing the relationship between all these forms of art. Outline of features and elements of these art forms. 
Influence of philosophy and thinking in the development of these art forms. Trends in art forms and their relation to the Influence of science and technology - a subjective and objective analysis. 

Principles and features, common to all fields of art and design.
;;Selz Peter, Art in Our Times, Thames & Hudson 1982. 
Billingto Michael, Performing Arts - an lIlustratred Guide, Mac Donald, 1980. 
Mohaly-Nagy L., Painting Photography, Film, Lund Humphries. 
;;
VC 615;Study of Indian thought and philosophy and its relation to visual communications. Meaning of our festivals, mythology, the nature of religious ceremonies and other cultural diversities. Study of various Indian visual symbols. Study of Indian patterns and colours. 
Discussion of Indian cultural identity and its interpretation through visual communications. Experiments to create design with inherent Indianess. 

;;Iyer Bharatha K., Indian Art-a Short Introduction, Taraporwala 1982. 
Gandhi Indira, Eternal India, BI Publications 1980. 
Boner, Sharma Baumer; Vastusutra Upanishad, Motilal Banrasides, 1982.;;
VC 616;Investigation of human physical characteristics and limitations with respect to the environment as related to visual communications. 
Ergonomics as applied to visual-legibility studies. Use of eye movement recorder in visual analysis. Environmental conditions of illumination-study of figure and ground relationships. Research techniques in ergonomic data generation. 

;;Woodson Wesely E., Human Factors Design Hanbook McGraw Hill Co. N.Y. 1981. 
;;
VC 617;Advanced typographic studies of typefaces and other print elelmeents, so as to form the basic mateial for planning visual aids for teaching typography at art school levels. Typographic research and legibility studies including line length, leading, type weights etc. 
Computer aided typography and type design : theoretical backgroundd. 

Advanced typographic assignments including magazine grid, newspaper page layout, lodgos, technical manuals bilingual public information etc. 

Indian lalguage typography-research and design development. 

The electvie is intended to provide design and technological inputs in India context through real project situations of typographic design. 

;;Klare G.R.A. manual for Readable Writing; Rem Co, Maryland: 1975 
Seybold J.W. Fundamentals of Modern Composition; Seybold publications Inc Pennsylvania; 1977 
Kolers P.A. Wrolstad M.E. and Bouma H. (EDs), processing of Visual Language Vol. 1 and Vol 2, plenum, New York (1978 and 1980) 
;;
VC 619;Advanced techniques, aesthetics and communication in the photographic medium. Advanced technical and creative work on problems and projects in various areas of photography. 
Photo-techniques for audio-visuals. Planning, scrpting, shooting editing and programming audior-visuals, Special effects and techniques in AV production. 

Individually planned photography and audio visual project of different complexities. 

;;Vance Adrian, Audiovisual Production, American Photographic Book Publishing Co., New York 1979. 
Lewll John, Multivision, Focal Press, London 1980. 
;;
VC 623;Approach to exhibition design-basic methods and techniques. Design of displays-2D and 3D. Design of display systems, structures and connections. Exhibition signage and typography. 
Designing international fairs and exhibition; Organizational and excutional aspects. Technical problems of packaging and shipment of exhibits. 

Special effectes and advanced techniques in exhibition design. 

;;Allowed John, The Great Exhibition, Studio Vista (1977) 
Ratterburg Arnold, Exhibit Design, Theory and Practice; Studio Vistaa (1971) 
Konikow R.B. Exhibition Design, Super Book House (1971) Neuburg Hans, Conceptional of International Exhibition, ABC edition (1969) 
;;
VC 625;Introduction to computers. Types of computers and their application to graphics. Computer Graphics as a tool for illustration. Excercises on computer graphics. Designing illustration and illustration. Sequance for specific applications: technical educational and informational. Investigation into improving communication value of illustration. Individually planned illustration design assignments.;;Prewitt.m .computer Graphics Crihton Michael, Electronic Life; knof. 1983 
Herdgwalter; Artist in the Service of Science, Graphics Press, 1973. 
;;
VC 627;Basics of video technology, video equipment handling and operations. 
Forms of video insstallation. Design methodology as connected with video programming. 

Project work involving making of short video films 

;;Robinson J.F. and Beards P.H. Using video tape; Focal Press, 1978 
Fredrick Robinson Joseph, Video Tape Recording; Theory and Practice, Focal Press 1978 
Moorfoot Rex, Television in the Eighties. 
;;
VC 631;Designer Attributes Setting up a Design Office. Finding clients.Business Correspondence. Brief and briefing/Letter of contract. 
Costing design and fee estimation. Management of Design Process. Human factor in design management/team work. Role of staff designer in R&D activities.Design Evaluation patent and Design Registration laws/procedure. Ethics and Professionalism. 

;;Gorb, Peter, Living by Design, Lund Humphries, London, 1978. 
Pulos, Arthur The American Design Ethic 1983, MIT (USA) 
Farr, Mihael, Design Management, Hoddar and Stoughton, London, 1966. 
Jones Christopher, Design Methods, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 1970. 
Staurt W. Rose, Achieving Excellence in your Design Practice, Whitney Library of Design: New York, 1987. 
David Burstein & Frank Stasiowski, Project Management for the Design Professional, Whitney Library of Design, New York, 1982. 
Goslett Dorothy, The Professional Practice of Design, Batszford, London 1971. ;;
VC 633;Study into the syntactic and semantic aspects of informative graphics. 
Practical problem solving by conversions of abstract, Quantitative concepts into visual images. 

Study of charts, maps and diagrams. 

Introduction to information theory and its applications. 

Symbolization of concepts for Information purposes. 

;;Bertin, Jacques, Graphic Information Processing, Flammarion, 1977. 
Herdeg, Walter, Graphic Diagrams, The Graphic Press, 1976. Tufte, 
Edward, Visual Display of Quantitative Informations, Graphic Press, 1983. 
;;
VC 653;Introduction to applicaton of Computer Graphics for visualising concepts Introduction of hardware including operating systems, file management and hardware lmitations Introduction to the concepts of programming through hyperMedia. Exploration of various packages for illustration, drawing, Desk top publishing, page composition and animation. ;;Marshell G.R. Computer Graphics in Application, Prentice Hall, 1987 
Kerlow I.V. and Rosebush J., Computer Graphics for Designers and Artists 
Grieman A., The Fusion of Technology and Computer Graphic Design - Hybrid Imagery, Architecture, Design and Technology Press, 1990. 
;;
VC 654;Introduction to concept of semantica as related to visual phenomena images. Investigation of meaning attached to visual symbols. 
Conversion of verbal conceptsinto visual messages and vice-versa including their semantic analysis. Exploration of the concept of visual elements and develop visual awareness, imagination and creative insight. Observations regarding the parallel models available in other disciplines such as music, theatre, film, literature etc. 

Human information processing strategies with emphasis on processing of visual information. Gestalt theory, information theory and their application to spatial and spatio-temporal design problems. 

Concept of chunking of information, structure and its effects on communication of message. 

;;Drefuss Henry, Symbol Source Book, McGraw Hill Book co. Diethelm waalter, Visual Transformation, ABC Edition, 1982 
Birren Faaber, Colour - a survey in words and pictures, University Books Inc. N.Y. 1966 
Willows D.M., Houghton H.A., The Psychology of Illustration, Vol. 1 & 2. springer-Verlage, New York, 1987 
Wertheimer M., Principles of perceptual Organisation. In readings in Perception, ed.D. Beardslee and M. Wertheimer, Van Nostrand, 1966, PP. 115-135 
Kohler, w. Gestalt Psychology, New American Library New York,1947, PP.80-122 
Mole, A., Information Theory and aesthetic perception, University of Illinois press, Urban, 1968 
Miller G., Information and Memory. In perception: Mechanisms and Models, ed. 
R. held and W. Richards, W.H. Freeman and Co., San Franscisco, 1972, PP. 17-21, and also 
Miller G., The magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some limits on our capacity for processing information, in Readings in erceptions, ed. Wetheimer M., Van Nostrand, New York, 1966, PP.90-114. and its interpretation through visual commun;;
VC 669;Study of how designers think and solve design problems, using protocol analysis. Analysing and mapping of the design process. Understanding the structure of the design process and its non-linear nature. 
Telescoping of the analytical and the creative phases. Study of the influence of design tools. Issues involved in handling new tools.Identifying the role of imagery and visualization in analysis and creative bursts. Role of metaphors and analogies used in idea generation.Design process in a teamwork situation. Understanding design process through monitoring team interaction. Problems of communication between team members. Text/References Arnheim R., Visual Thinking, Univ. of California Press, Berkeley, 1969. Finke R., Creative imagery, Discoveries and Inventions in Visualization, Lawrence Erlbaum, New Jersey 1990. Kosslyn S.M,Ghosts in the Minds Machine, creating and using images in the brain,Norton, New York, 1983. Lawson B., How Designers Think: The design Process Demystified, Butterworth, Architecture, 1988. McKim R., Experiences in visual thinking, Brooks/ cole, California,1972. Porter T., How Architects Visualize, Van Nostrand, New York 1979. Sommer R, The Minds Eye, Imagery in Everyday Life, Delta book, New York, 1978. 

;;Goldschmidt G., Serial Sketching: Visual Problem Solving in Design, Cybernetics and Systems, 23, 11992. 
Ibid., On figural Conceptualization in Architectural Design, in Procedings of 11th EMCSR. Vienna, April 1992. 
Ibid., Visual: Tacit Information Processing via Sketching, Procedings of the 3rd International Symp. on Systems research, Information and Cybernetics, Baden, 1991 Fish J. and Scrivener S., Amplifying the Minds Eye: Sketching and Visual Cognition, LEONARDO,23,1,1990, pp 117-1126. 
Hwang T.S., & Ullman D.G., The Design Capture System: Capturing Back-of-the envelop s;;
MG 611;Evolution of Management as a discipline : Overview of theories: Objectives and Nature of Management: Overview of functions.Technology context: Historical perspectives of Technology Management (TM). Facets of TM : Description,Impact identification, Assessment,Forecast,Technology in the productivity cycle,Higher order effects,Diffusion and Transfer,Innovation and R & D. Introduction to Technology Forecasting. 
Technical change and its measurement. Strategies for handling the dynamics of technical change. Introduction to mechanisms for generating and abosrbing technical change. 

Links with other disciplines , including organisational behaviour, accounting, marketing and operations management. 

;;Porter A.L.,et al,A Guide Book for Technology Assessment and Impact Analysis Series Vol.4,North-Holland,(1980). 
Cetron M.J.,Technological Forecasting,Gordon and Breach, (1987). 
Bright J.R. and Schoeman A.E.F.(Eds.), A Guide to Practical Technological Forecasting,(1973). 
Horwich M.(Ed.).,Technology in the Modern Corporation: A strategic Perspective,Pergamon Press,(1986). 
Hawthorne E.P.,The Management of Technology,McGraw Hill,(1978). 
Babcock D.L.,Managing Engineering Technology,Prentice Hall,(1991). 
Betz F.,Managing Technology:Competing through new Ventures,Innovation and corporate research,Prentice Hall,(1987). 
;;
MG 612;Objectives of the firm,Flows of funds in a firm,Techniques of financial analysis,Management of working capital, Nature of risk and aspects of risk evaluation, Capital budgeting system,Profit planning and control,Short-term and long-term debt financing; Industrial securities market, Internal financing and dividend policy.Cost of capital and Capital structure. Management of enterprise financial affairs. 

;NIL;Solomon E.,Theory of Financial Management,Columbia University Press, (1964). 
Bierman H.Jr.and Smdidi S.,The Capital Budgeting Decision,Macmillan, (1971). 
;;
MG 613;The firm; Objectives and Constraints: Basic Principles;Opportunity cost.Discounting and Compounding,Marginal or Incremental and Equi-Marginal and Time Perspective. Demand and Revenue Analysis. 
Demand Estimation, Analysis and Forecasting.Production analysis, Demand Cost and Supply Analysis. Price and Output Determination.Investment Analysis and Social Cost Benefit Analysis. 

Macro Economics. 

Brief overview of Indian economy,Planning and Economic Development, Role of Agriculture, Industry and Teritiary sectors in the Indian Economy. Regulatory,Legislative,Fiscal,Monetary and Promotional Policies of the Government, New Economic Policy,International Trends and their Impacts. Seminars, Project. 

;;Rao V.K.R.V,India"s National Income,SAGE Pub, Asia Pub.House, (1983). 
Dutt R. and Sundaram K.M.P., Indian Economy,Chand S & Co.,(1991). 
Singh T.,Indian Planning Experience, Macmillan India. 
;;
MG 614;Marketing Concept and Process. Consumer and Industrial Buyer Behaviour, Organization Buying: Market Segmentation, Targeting and Positioning, Marketing Information System and Research, Marketing Planning for Industrial and Consumer Products, Marketing Decision Variables: Product, Price, Distribution and Promotion Devices, Marketing Control. Purchasing as Reverse Marketing Process. Advertising and Media Choice. Direct Marketing. Marketing Channels. Sales and Demand Forecasting. Marketing Strategy. Customer Service Management. Product plus Concept.
;;Philip Kotler, Marketing Management, Prentice Hall of India, 9th Ed., 1997.
Stanton, Etzel and Walker, Fundamentals of Marketing, Mc Graw-Hill Inc., 19th Edition, 1994.
Reeder, Brierty and Reeder, Industrial Marketing, Prentice Hall of India, 2nd Ed., 1997.
Agarwal, Burger and Reid, Readings in Industrial marketing, Prentice Hall Inc., 1986.
;;
MG 615;Decision environment, Decision making processes; Optimization,Search problems;Heuristics; Role of knowledge;Deterministic and probabilistic situations,Single and multiple person decision making. 
Linear Programming models; Primal and dual solution approaches: Sensitivity analysis. 

Decision making with multiple objectives;Goal programming;Analytical hierarchy process. 

Integer linear programming and applications. 

Dynamic programming and applications. 

Nonlinear programming;Unconstrained and constrained optimization, Kuhn-Tucker theory; Quadratic programming applications. 

Decision making under risk and uncertainty; Decision criteria; Utility theory. 

Game theory: Queuing models;Markov decision processes; Applications to inventory management and Replacement processes. 

Discrete event simulation;Generation of random variables,Simulation processes and languages. 

Cases 

;;Ravindran A.,Phillips D.T. and Solberg J.J.,Operations Research: 
Principles and Practice,John Wiley,2nd Ed.,(1987). 
Bazarra M.S.,Jarvis J.J. and Sherali H.D.,Linear Programming and Network flows, 2nd Ed.,John Wiley,(1990). 
Winston W.L.,Operations Research:Application and algorithm,Kent P.W.S,2nd Ed.,(1991). 
Taha H.A.,Operations Research: An Introduction, Macmillan,(1982). 
Kapoor R.,Computer assisted decision models Tata McGraw Hill,(1991). 
;;
MG 616; Components of human resource management (HRM).Interaction of individual,groups and organization. Human resource management at work. Selection,Training and Development (AC, MDP,MEP, CEP), Performance appraisal and career planning. Legal aspects and HRM. Industrial dispute act, Indian trade union act,Indian employment act. 
Wage and salary administration. Collective bargaining and industrial disputes.Grievance handling, Negotiation strategies and welfare schemes.Crisis and disaster management. 

;;Anderson G.C.,Managing performance appraisal systems.,Blackwell Oxford,(1993). 
Evans P.,Doz Y., Laurent A., Human resource management in international firms: Change, Globalization and innovation, New York, (1991). 
McBeath G.,The handbook of human resource planning. Blackwell Oxford,(1992). 
Pareek U, and Rao T.V. Designing and Managing human resources systems,New Delhi,IBH,(1981). 
Werther W.B.and Davis K.,Human resource and personnel management.,3rd International Student Edition.,(1991). 
;;
MG 617;An overview of the accounting process. Nature and scope of corporate accounting. 

Elements of cost; Material,Labour direct expenses, Overheads,Purchasing procedure,Valuation of inventory,Remuneration for labour and accounting.Classification and distribution of overheads. 

Interlocked and integrated cost accounting system;Cost accounting flows. 

Financial accounting concepts.Accounting for fixed and current assets,Short terms and long terms and long terms liabilities and owners funds. Accounting for fictitious assets and obsolescence. 

Impact of exchange rates. Balance sheet preparation. Financial statement analysis. 

Cost and management decisions: Make or buy sell or process operation shutdown,Rent or buy,Lease or buy,Pricing,Product mix,Inventory,Marketing operations. Productcosting.Break even analysis and Cost profit relationships. Capital and Cash Budgeting for return on capital,Periodic and continuous budgeting,Budgetary control. Reporting systems for control;Scope for computerization. 

Project costing : Costing of Project,Project cost reduction methods and Projects audit. Technology costing: Fixed assests,Investment in New technology: Evaluation of risk, Determination of technology investment strategy. 

;NIL;Anthony R.N.,Fundamentals of Management Accounting Principles, Taraporewala,(1981). 
Brown J.L. and Howard L.R.,Principles of Management Accounting,ELBS 4th ed.,(1982). 
Horngren C.T.,Accounting for Management Control:An introduction, Prentice Hall,New Delhi, (1976). 
Pocock M.A. and Taylor A.H.,Handbook of Financial Planning and Control,Gower,Westmead,(1981). 
Rossell J.H.,Frasure W.W. and Taylor D.H.,Managerial Accounting,3rd ed.,Merrill,Columbus,(1980). ;;
MG 618;Role of production and operations management within the broader company system, Analysis for operations management. Planning manufacturing facilities- Location,Capacity planning and layout design, Concept of group technology. Planning and control of operations-Production forecasting aggregate planning, Material requirements planning,Manufacturing resource planning,Operations scheduling Work force management. ;;Krajewski, Lee J. and Ritzman, Larry P.,"Operations Management Strategy and Analysis",Addison-Wesley Publishing Company,(1990). 
Monks J., Operations Management,McGraw Hill Int.,(1984). 
Buffa E.S., Production and Operations Management,JAL,7th Ed., (1989). 
McClain J.O. and Thomas L.J., Operations Management,Prentice Hall India, (1985).;;
MG 620;Data, Information and knowledge. Concepts of information representation: Storage,Transformation,Dissemination, Discrimination and Transmission. 
Management Information Systems:Information flow, Systems analysis and design. Data base management systems, Paradigms,Design and implementation of relational data bases for managerial applications; Retrieval aspects: Security and privacy. 

Specification and configuration of computer based systems; Costing and performance audit. 

DOS and UNIX programming environments: Programming in a High Level Language, exposure to Standard packages,Operations Research Packages and Expert system shells. 

Applications in management:Technology,Manufacturing, Finance and Human resource development. 

;;Davis G.B.,Computers and Information Processing, McGraw Hill,(1978). 
Korth H.F. and Silberchatz A.,Database Systems Concepts,McGraw Hill,(1986). 
;;
MG 621; Technology as A Strategic Organizational Resource. Technology Strategy and Its Linkage with Corporate Strategy, Elements of Modern Technology strategy. Technology Audit. Approaches to Technology Strategy Formulation. Evaluation of Technology Plan, Some Tools for Strategic Analysis: STA/Business Matrix, Technology Generation Matrix, and Technology Delivery Matrix. Strategies of Product Design and Process Technology Development and Linkage with Business Strategy. Emerging Mechanisms for Strategic Technology Management: Strategic Alliances, Joint Ventures, Strategic Partnering, Technology Networking, in-house R & D.
;;Horowitch (ED), Technology in the modern Corporation: A Strategic perspective, Pergamon Press, 1986.
M. Dodgson (ED), Technology and the firm: Strategies, management 7 Public Policy, Longman, Harlow, 1989.
L. W. Steele, Managing technology: The strategic view, MC Graw Hill, 1989.
R. A. Burgeleman and M A Maidique, Strategic Management of Technology and Innovation, Irwin, Illionis, 1988.
P. Lowe, The Management of Technology: perceptions and opportunities, Chapman & Hall, London, 1995.
;;
MG 655; Concept of Corporate Strategy and Group Corporate Strategy, Concepts of Competitive Strategy. Industry Analysis and Corporate Strategy. Some Techniques of Strategic Analysis. BCG Matrix, Porter"s framework of Competitive Forces, SPACE Analysis, Business Classification Matrix. GE Multifactor Portfolio Matrix, Strategic and Long Range Planning, Corporate Restructuring. Implementing Strategy in the New Environment. Linking Corporate Strategy to Structure. The 7S Model for Strategy Implementation
;;M. Porter, Competitive Strategy, Free Press, 1984. 
G. J. Pearson, Straetgic Thinking, Prentice Hall of India. Johnson and Scholes, Exploring Corporate Strategy: Test and Case, Prentice Hall of India.,3rd Edition, 1996.
;;
MG 623; Attributes of Quality. Evolution of Philosophy of Quality Management. Quality Assurance and Total Quality Management, Models of Quality Management, Customer Value Enhancement, Product Quality Improvement - QFD, Taguchi Methods, FMCEA Analysis, Product Reliability Analysis, Fault Tree Analysis Process Quality Improvement - TQC Tools, Statistical Process Control, Acceptance Sampling, Pokayoke System, Service Quality, Tools and Techniques of Service Quality Improvement, Quality Costs and Cost Driver Analysis, Strategic Quality Planning, Quality in Non-Manufacturing Activities: Finance, Marketing, Human Resource Management, Administration, Quality System Implementation: ISO 9000, Quality Information Systems, Quality
Audit & Reporting, Human Resource Management in TQM Environment, Case Studies.
;;R. L. Chase, Total quality management IFS, 1988.
N. Logothetis: Managing for total quality, Prentice Hall of India, 1997
J. S. Oakland: Total quality management, Heinemann, Oxford, 1989.
;;
MG 625;  Contract   Act.  Company  Law,Sales  of   Goods   Act.Partnership
Act,Negotiable instrument Act.Arbitration Act,Limitation Act  and
Provisions  regarding Instruction of court. Patent and  Trademark
Act.Income   Tax,Wealth  Tax,Central  Sales  Act.   Local   Sales
Tax.Transfer  of Property Act, Stamp Act.  Constitutional  Provisions
regarding control and Regulation of Industries and  Foreign Exchange
Regulation  Act. Employees Provident  Fund  and  Family Pension Act
1951.

Employees State Insurance Act and Workmen"s Compensation Act  and
central  Excise  and Sea Custom Acts and  Import/Export  Act  and
Regulations.

;;Taxmann"s Corporate Laws, Taxmann, 1997.
;;
MG 630;Corporate strategy for product planning,Management thinking on new products,Seeing products as part of the image of the company,Moving into future; Defining companies business. Technology transfer problems,SWOT analysis, Analysis of strength,Weakness, Opportunities and threat brief in production to assessing of companies financial performance. 
Study of Product life cycle,Monitoring of sale and competition,When to introduce new products. 

Assessing market potentials for new products,Market research,Consumer research and its demographic aspects,Setting up a questionnaire for these aspects. Establishing market segments and their dimensions. Assessing competitors,Marketing approach and developing a strategy to introduce new products,Using market gaps as competitive edge,Cost considerations and profitability of new products,Developing a product plan and product mix,Price policy,Positioning the company,product positioning, Planning for future position. 

Evolving a design brief by interlinking with market/product plan. 

Seeing product design as a part of a scheme to develop broad image,Bouse style,Marketing strategy and corporate image. 

Discriminating product range from each other and from competitor"s range. 

Developing product specifications for different products within the range. 

Market communication,Launching the product, Monitoring the market performance. 

;;Wind J. and Mahajan V. and Cardogo,New Product Forecast,Lexington Book,(1981). 
Holt K.,Geschka H. and Peterlongo G.,Need Assessment - A key to user oriented Product Innovation, John Wiley,London,(1984). 
Churchill G.A., Marketing Research, Drydin Press, Chicago, (1993). 
;;
MG 631;Understanding the process of technological innovation and the factors affecting successful innovation -Staffing,Structure and strategy. Critical functions in the innovation process and characteristics of role players.Evolution of Entreprenuerial network. 
Product and technology life cycle - R&D planning.Formulation of Research Strategy from the objective of the organisation. 

Selection of R&D projects,Project planning, Execution and control.Methodologies for evaluating the effectiveness of R&D,Protection of Intellectual property rights. 

Creativity and Innovation - Creative process,Individual and group creativity, Organisation climate for promoting creativity. 

Case study of R&D organisation in India. 

;;Babcock D.L., Managing Engineering and Technology, Prentice Hall, (1991). 
Betz F.,Managing Technology:Competing through New Ventures,Innovation and Corporate Research,Prentice Hall,(1987). 
Balderston J., Birndaum P.,Goodman R. and Michael Stahl, Modern Management Techniques in Engineering and R&D,Van Nostrand Reinhold, (1984). 
Dhillon B.S.,Engineering Management,Technomic Publishing Co.,(1987). 
Blake S.P.,Managing for Responsive Research and Developement,Freeman and Co.,(1978). 
Mcleod T.,The Management of Research,Development and Design in Industry,Gower Technical Press,(1988). 
;;
MG 632;Forecasting to support technological strategic and operational planning.Elements of a forecastng process. Forecasting techniques based on time series models,Precursor,Envelope curves and experience curves. Technical assessment, Delphi method, Qualitative techniques based on morphological analysis and technological gap analysis.Organising for Technology Forecasting. Case studies in equipment design and information technology.Technology in social context.Assessment: Components;Problems definition, Description, Social description,Forecasts.Impact identification, Measures, Assessment.Strategies for assessment,Bounding of assessment.Impact analysis,Economic impact analysis.Qualitative and quantitative facets. Assessment of risks and uncertainity. Safety and environment regulations.Critiques. ;;Fowles J., Handbook of Future Research,Greenwood Press,(1978). 
Jones H. and Twiss B.C.,Forecasting Technology for planning Decisions, Macmillan,(1978). 
Marinto J.P.,Technological Forecasting for Decision Making,North Holland,2nd Ed.,(1993). 
Porter A.L.,et.al.,A Guide Book for Technology Assessment and Analysis series Vol.4,North Holland,(1980). 
;;
MG 633;Concept of new Ventures: New Venture management ; An overview Managing issues of different fronts simultaneously,Strategic and Operational implication. Project reassessment: Problems in implementation,Cost and item overruns,Recasting assumptions,New environmental framework,Project viability.Technology absorption : Product and process technologies,Appropriate technology,Import/indigeneous availability of technology.Policy issues in Finance:Shortage of operating funds,Sources of funds and how to tap them, Venture capital financing.Policy issues in Marketing: Characteristics of marketing,New venture products and services,Constraints,Successful strategies in practice.Networkingin New Venture: Networking with industries,Networking with institution,Type of networking,Survival and Growth networking,Operational and strategic networking.Developing Systems in new venture:Planning for growth,Change in structure and systems.New ventures and strategic planning. ;;Timmons.J.,New Venture Creation: Entreprenuership in the 1990"s, Irwin,3rd ed.,(1988). 
Roberts E.B.,Generating Technological Innovation,Oxford University Press,(1987). 
Hubbard R.T, Hailos W.D,Jr., Small Business Management,Delmar Publication Inc,4th ed.,(1988). 
;;
MG 634;Characteristics of projects,Definition and objective of project management, Stages of project management.Role of project manager. 
Project Definition, Financing the projects,Cost estimating and cost control,Planning and Scheduling, Resource Scheduling, Managing Progress,Motivating the participant,Integrated systems for planning and control. 
;;Kerzner, Project Management,CBS Publication, (1991). Moder 
J.J.,Phillips C.R.and Davis W.,Project Management with CPM,PERT and Precedence Diagramming,Reinhold, Newyork, 3rd ed.,(1964). 
Roman D.,Managing Projects: A system approach,Elsevier Science Publishing Co.Inc,(1986). 
Lock D.,(ed), Project Management handbook,Gower Technical Press Ltd.,(1987). 
Wiest J.D.and Levy F.K.,A management guide to CPM/PERT,Englewood Cliff N.J., Prentice Hall., 2nd ed.,(1977). 
Whitehouse G.E.,System Analysis and Design using network Techniques,Englewood cliffs,N.J.Prentice Hall,(1975). 
;;
MG 635; Manufacturing"s Role in Corporate Strategy, Defining Product Markets, Competitive Priorities and Manufacturing Tasks. New Emerging Paradigms of Manufacturing, Value Creation and Flexibility. Manufacturing Policy Formulation and Implementation, Structural and Infrastructural. Theory of Constraints, Capacity and Facilities Strategy, Manufacturing Technology Strategy, Vertical Integration, Sourcing and Outsourcing, Organisational Focus and Manufacturing Strategy. Linkages between Manufacturing & Marketing, R & D, Technology and Business Strategies. Strategy Audit and Evaluation, Manufacturing Performance Analysis. Strategies for Engineering and Process Industries.

;; T. Hill, Manufacturing strategy, Mcgraw Hill, 1994.
S. Wheelwright, R. Hayes, Restoring our competitive edge, John Wiley, 1989.
R. H. Hayes, G. P. Pisano & D. M. Upton, Strategic operatoins, Text and cases, The Free Press, New York, 1996.
;;
MG 636;Motivation : Qualitative aspects of managerial decision making: Examples:Issues in design of intelligient systems.Exact and Heuristic approaches for satisficing solutions: Planning.Knowledge representation paradigms,Respresentation of uncertainty, Non-monotonic problems,Co-operative aspects. Learning and adaptive systems.Applications in technology and Business Management. ;;Charniak,Introduction to Artifical Intelligence, Addison Wesley,(1985). 
Quinlan R. (Ed.,) Applications of Artifical Intelligence,Australian National Conference on Artificial Intelligence,(1989). 
Pearl,Probabilistic Methods in Intelligent Systems,(1988). 
Malacic R.(Eds.),Intelligent Manufacturing Systems: I and II, Elsevier, (1988). 
;;
MG 637;Scientific explanation and theories of technological change.Innovations and technological change.Economic analysis of technological change - Competitive advantage,Productivity growth. The firm,Production and Technical change. Production cycle and Technology gap theories. 
Spread of new technology - Diffusion of Innovation. Modelling the diffusion process. Inter firm and inter country approach. Methodologies for predicting change. Managing organisational change. 

;;Stoneman P., The Economic Analysis of Technical change, Oxford University Press,(1983). 
Coombs R.,Saviotti P. and Walsh V., Economics of Technical Change, McMillan,(1987). 
Davies S., The Diffusion of Process Innovations,Cambridge University Press,(1979). 
Kirkpatrick D.L.,How to Manage Change Effectively,Jossey bass,(1985). 
Smith S. and Tranfied D., Managing Change and making it stick, IFS Publications,(1991). ;;
MG 638;International Monetary Systems, Exchange Rates and Foreign Exchange markets, Tariffs, Restrictions and their impact on International trade, Theories of International trade, Macroeconomic Policy in an open economy, International financial Intergration, The role of foreign direct investment and Multinationalsin a developing economy. ;;Shapiro A.C.,Multinational Financial Management,Allyn & Bacon, (1989). 
Eiteman D. and Stonehiel A., Multinational Business Finance, Addison Wesley,(1986). 
Levi M.,International Finance, McGraw Hill, (1985). 
;;
MG 639;Market entry  strategies, Application  of marketing principles in
foreign markets, Identification  and evaluation  of opportunities in
foreign  markets.  Strategies  for  International  Marketing.Business
in a protected  environment, Globalisation of  business, Compulsions
and Challenges, Business strategies  in  the  globalised  environment.

Global  production,  International  finance, Global R&D
effort,Organising for globalisation.Cases, Project.
;;Robinson R.D.,Internationalisation of Business: An Introduction,CBS College Pub.,Illinois,(1984). 
Negandhi A.R., International Management, Allyn and Bacon, MA,(1987). 
National Academy of Engineering,The Technological Dimension of International Competetiveness,National Academic Press,Washington D.C.,(1988). 
;;
MG 640;Technology & Design. Nature of Design and Development Process,Setting up a product design and development unit. Manpower planning for D&D unit, Designer attributes and designer selection. 
Managing creative design teams, Methods of enhancing creative output,Design brief/Design evaluation, Costing of design effort, Corporate design & development policy. Planning a design programme,Patenting & design registration.Evaluation of Design.Case Studies. 

;;Michael F., Design Management, M.Far Ltd. Hodder & Stoughton, London, (1966). 
Dorothy G., The professional Practice of Design, Batszfor, London,(1971). 
Pulos Arthur J.,Contact-selling Industrial Design Services, Office of Design Department of Industry, Trade & Commerce, Ottawa, (1975). 
Andreasen M.M.,Integrated Product Developement, IFS Publications Ltd., Springer Verlag, Berlin, (1987). 
Howard A., Safer by Design, Design council London,(1987). 
Burstein D. and Stasiowski F.,Project management for the Design professional, Whitney Library of Design, New York,(1982). 
Stuart W.R., Achieving Excellence in your Design Practice,Whitney Library of Design,(1987). ;;
MG 641;Materials Management Concepts and objectives for material function, Admistrative practices,Purchasing system,Purchasing cycle,Make or buy decisions,Vendor development and evaluation,Reciprocity and ethics in purchasing,Inventory control and management, Purchase negotiations and pricing-purchase procedures,Policy and procedure manuals. 
Demand Forecasting, Roles and Applications of management Science, Value analysis. 

Import and canalisation, Legal aspects and considerations,Technological developments. 

Spare parts management, Store layout and management traffic and transportation,Physical distribution,Disposal of scrap,Standardisation,Computer applications in purchasing and Inventory control, Evaluating materials management function. MIS for materials management, Materials budgetory control. 

;;Ballot, Materials Management, Taraporewala,Bombay, (1980). 
Ammer D.S., Materials Management, Taraporewala, (1977). 
Gopalakrishnan P.,Handbook of Materials Management,Prentice Hall of India,(1994). 
Baily P.and Farmer D., Materials Management.Handbook,Gower Publications,(1982). 
Gopalkrishnan P., Sandilya M.S., Inventory Management, Macmillan,Delhi, (1981). 
Shah N.M., An Integrated concept of Material Management, Tata McGraw-Hill,New Delhi (1988). 
;;
MG 643;Economic role and primary objective of financial institutions, Environment of financial institutions, Nature of assets and Liabilities of financial institutions, Financial management of non bank financial intermediates, Management of bank portfolios. 

;NIL;Robicheck A.A. and Coleman A.B., Management of Financial Institutions, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, (1967). 
Hempel G.H., Yawitz J.B., Financial Management of Financial Institutions, Prentice Hall,(1977). 
Bradley S.P. and Crane D.B.,Management of Bank Portfolios,Wiley, (1975). 
Taylor B.and Moubray G.D.; Strategic Planning for Financial Institutions,Bodley,(1974). ;;
MG 647;Entreprenuers and Innovation,Role of the entreprenuer, Sources of Entreprenuers, Entreprenuers in organisations and Partnerships, Incubators, New firm formation, Sources of funding.Business plan, Using Business plans to achieve goals, Successful product innovation, The enterprise economy, Small business and employment creation, Startup and success rates, Venture capital, Growth of new firms.;;Karnik M.M.,Entrepreneurship Development,MSSIDC,Bombay,(1976). 
Patel V.G., Entrepreneurship Development Programme in India and its relevance to developing countries, Ahmedabad,Entrepreneurship Development Institute of India, (1987). 
Deshpande M.V.,Entrepreneurship of small Scale Industries,Deep and Deep,New Delhi,(1984). 
Rao V.G., Entrepreneurship and growth of enterprise in Industrial estates,Deep and Deep Publisher. Parker R.C.,The Management of Innovation,Wiley, Chichester, (1982). 
;;
MG 644;Origin and evolution of system science Open and closed systems. 
Systems and Complexity. Modeling Systems - Well structured systems,Poorly structured systems. Systems view of Management and Organisations,Cybernetic view of management and Organisation theory. Viable system model. Soft systems and Checklands methods. 

Socio-technical system. Application of VSM and STS to management problems. 

;;Cummins T.G. (Ed.), Systems Theory for Organisation Development, John Wiley,(1980). 
Floor R.L. and Carson E.R., Dealing with Complexity, Plenum Press,(1988). 
Beer S., Diagnosing the system for Organisation, Wiley ,(1985). 
Checkland P.,Systems Methodology in Practice,Wiley,(1990). 
;;
MG 646;  Introduction:Industrial Dynamics Perspective the decision process as viewed and modelled in industrial dynamics,Characteristics of system and models,Software selection validation. 

Concepts in model construction: Process generation,Generating Pseudo random numbers,Data collection and analysis,Theoretical and experimental study. 

Conducting a complete modelling study:Planning and conceptualizing the study,Gathering data,Model formulations software development and testing unit time and event advance,Implementing results, Presentation to management. 

Waiting line analysis of industrial systems:Networks of waiting lines, Queueing models,Its applications and simulation. 

Experimental optimization. 

Applications : Scheduling of large scale projects,Modelling of public sector, Warehousing, Facility utilization etc. 

Introducton to simulation games,Development of simulation software. 

;MG;Law A.M. and Kelton W.D., Simulation Modelling Analysis, McGraw Hill,(1982). 
Pritsker A.A.B.,Introduction to Simulation and Slam II,2nd Ed., Wiley,(1979). 
Banks J. and Carson J.S.,Discrete Event Simulation,Prentice Hall,(1984). 
Brattery P., Fox B.L. and Schrage L.E.,Guide to Simulation, Springer-Verlag,New York,(1983). 
James R.E. and Sisson R.L.,Design and Use of Computer Simulation, Models Macmillan,(1971). 
;;
MG 648; Introduction; Problem identification and definition,Research design; Data collection approaches,Sampling,Measurement and Scaling,Statistical analysis of multivariate data; Cases; Project. ;NIL;Churchill G.A., Marketing Research,Chicago Drydin Press, (1993). 
Green P.E. and Tull D.S.,Research for Marketing Decision,Prentice Hall,India, (1982). 
Luck D.J.,and Rubin R.S.,Marketing Research , 7th Ed.,Prentice Hall, (1987). 
;;
MG 650;Quality needs;Quality considerations;Quality systems. Managing quality;Quality assurance,Planning and control. 
Improving quality,Deming cycle,Taguchi approach, Process model (crossby); TQM. Quality costs; Human factors in quality. Organizing for quality; Zero defects,Quality circles,Kanban; Kaizen;Quality function deployment,Auditing. 

Quality standards;IS0 9000/IS 14000 Quality specification; Sources of variation.Inspection and testing for acceptance;Lot acceptance sampling;Continuous sampling.Statistical Process Control;Process capability;Tolerance assignment;Control charts Robust product and process design;Quality loss function;Average quality loss;Exploiting non-linearity;Parameters affecting product process;Design of experiments;Analysis;Search for optimum. 

Inspection equipment and techniques. 

;;Harison L.B.,Ghare M.P., Quality Control and Applications, Prentice Hall,(1987). 
Bossert J.L.,Quality Function Deployment.Marcel Dekkar, (1991). 
David H., Quality circles Handbook, Pitman,(1985). 
Udpa S.R., Quality circles in India, Tata McGraw Hill,(1986). 
Feigenbanm A.V.,Total Quality Control, McGraw Hill,(1983). 
Oakland J.S., Statistical Process Control, A Practical Guide, Heinemamn,(1987). 
Phadke M.S., Quality Engineering Using Robust Design, Prentice Hall, (1989). 
;;
MG 651;The communication process.Verbal communication. Non-verbal communication. Barriers to communication.The Role of feedback.How to develop good listening skills.Seven communication habits of highly effective people. 
Effective communication techniques for motivating others, Generating team work,Reprimanding,Negotiating,Understanding others in the organization, Selling your ideas to others. Assertive communication versus aggressive communication. 

Oral and written presentations. Communicating in public. 

Organizing,Outlining and delivering the speech. The Informative speech and the persuasive speech. Conducting Effective meetings. 

Written communications in business. 

;;Hybels S. and Weaver R.L.,Communicating Effectively, 4th ed.,McGraw Hill,(1994). 
Stewart J., Bridges Not Walls: A Book About Interpersonal Communication, 6th ed.,.McGraw Hill,(1995). 
Bradford A.J. and Guberman R.,Transactional Awareness: Now I"ve Got You...In Business, Addison - Wesley, (1978). 
Norma Carr- Ruffino, Writing Short Business Reports,McGraw Hill, (1980). 
;;
MG 652;Introduction : General objectives,Functions;Organization and administration of maintenance systems; Requirements, Concepts and structure of suitable organisations for maintenance systems. 
Failure Analysis : Analysis for source identification,Classification land selectivity of failure ;Statistical and reliability concepts and models for failure analysis; Classification of Maintenance Systems:Basis and models for various maintenance systems; Decision Models For Maintenance Planning : Operation and Control, Optimum level of maintenance;Replacement aspects of break down and preventice types, Group and individual types, Obsolete facility, Deteriorating and completely failing facilities, Replacement vs. 


;;Higgins L.T.,Morrow L.C., Maintenance Engineering HandBook,McGraw Hill,(1977). 
Newborought B.T., Effective Maintenance Management,McGraw Hill,(1967). 
Lewis G.T. and W.W.Pearson,Maintenance Management, JE Rider, (1963). 
Kelly A. & Harris M.J, Management of Industrial Maintenance,Newness-Butterworths, London (1978). 
Jarding A.K., Operations Research in Maintenance, Manchestor University Press,(1970). 
Foster J.W.,Phillips D.T. and Rogers T.R.,Reliability, Availability and Maintainability, M/A Press, (1981). 
Heintzelman J.E.,The Complete Handbook of Maintenance Management,Prentice Hall,(1976). 
Patton J.D.(Jr), Maintainability and Maintainance,Management Instrument Society of America,(1980). 
;;
MG 653;Role of Simulation-Scope and Purchase Involved in Simulation Process. Simulation Modelling- Stochastic Models, Process Generators, What If Scenarios. Simulation Languages, Simulators Simulation Softwares-Evaluation and Application Case Studies in Corporate Planning, Marketing, Inventory, Scheduling, Quality, Capital Budgeting. System Dynamic Models and their Corporate Applications.;;I. Banks and I. S. Carson, Discrete Event Simulation, Prentice Hall of India, 1987.
;;
MG 654; Customer driven strategies in production and distribution systems. 
Integrated production and distribution networks. Supply chain management in the context of JIT and MRP -2. Distributon Resource planning. Management of dealer networks. 

Total quality control and product innovation across the supply chain. Incoming logistics and supplier relationships. Value addition analysis. 

Metrics for measurement of supply- chain performance.Mathematical models and computer assisted decision support for supply chain management. Mathematical programming and other models for supply chain decisions. 

Case studies from the literature and practice. 

Prerequisites : Basic familarity with mathematical modelling and 

optimization. 

;;Martin Christopher, Logistics and Supply Chain Management, Richard Erwin, (1994). 
Thomas F. W.,Customer Driven Strategies, Oliver White, (1992). 
Bradley S.P., Hax A. Magnanti T.L., Applied Mathematical Programming, Addison Wesley, (1977). 
William A. Sandras, ( Jr),JIT : Making it happen, Oliver White, (1989). 
Korgaonkar M.G.,Just-in-time manufacturing,Macmillan, (1992). 
;;
MG 658;Review of basic microeconomics & welfare economics, demand and its estimation; and economic cost, cost functions (short-run, long-run) and their estimation. 
Pricing, including demand and usage sensitive pricing, based around a number of case studies from different situations, such as transportation (ex : operation of toll roads), utilities (ex: electric supply, and facilities (ex: waste- water treatment). 

;;Hendrickson & Wohl, Transportation Investment and Pricing Principles, John Wiley, (1984). 
;;
MG 660;Management of change; TQM, Kaizen and ISO 9000,Process deinition, Business Processes, Role of Informtion Technology - Networking , Shared Data bases, Distributed Computing & Experts Systems, Process Redesign and evaluation , Case Studies - Kodak, Ford Motor, IBM Credit, etc. The Indian Scene - Private and Public Sector, The challenges and imperatives, Case Studies.;;Michael Hammer and james Champy, Reengineering the Corporation, Nicholas Brealey Publishing, (1995). 
Jeffrey N. Lowenthal, Reengineering the Organizations, ASQC Quality press, (1994). 
Dr. Stanley Davis, 2001 Management, Simon and Schuster Press, (1992). 
Dr. Charlis Savage, Fifth Generation Management , Digital Press, (1992). 
Jayaraman M.S., Ganesh Natarajan, Rangaramanujan A.V., Business Process Reengineering , TMH Publishing Co, (1994). ;;
EE 201;Brief review of field aspects to introduce the basic variables and parameters of electrical circuits. Electrical circuit as an approximation of a field model. Classification of elements and devices of an electrical circuit. Kirchhoff"s Laws, different forms of KCL and KVL; independent sets of KCL and KVL equations.
Basic circuit analysis methods, Basis variables, Detailed considerations in mesh analysis, node analysis; elementary discussion of other types of analysis.

Network equivalents, transformations and theorems series-parallel-equivalents, star-delta transformations, substitution theorem, superposition theorem, Thevenin-Norton theorem, max. power transfer theorem, Tellegen"s theorem, reciprocity theorem.

Transients in RL, RC and RLC-circuits, Sinusoidal steady-state aspects, phaser diagram, Network analysis techniques and theorems for sinusoidal steady state conditions. Immittance loci, resonance phenomena.

Power in a.c. circuits, instantaneous and average power, RMS values, active power, reactive power, apparent power, and p.f. in a.c.circuits. Max. power transfer theorem under sinusoidal state conditions, half power frequencies, B/W and Q of a resonant circuit. Measurement of power. Poly-phase circuits, 3-phase Y-and delta-connections; analysis of balanced 3-phase systems.

;;K.V.V. Murthy and M.S. Kamath, Basic Circuit Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill, 1989. 
W.H. Hayt and J.E. Kemmerley, Engineering Circuit Analysis, Int. Student Ed. (4th) McGraw Hill, 1986. 
C.A. Desoer and E.S. Kuh, Basic Circuit Theory, McGraw Hill, 1969. 
;;
EE 202;Network classification, network components, Graph theory : 
The notions of circuit, cutset, tree, cotree etc. 
Matrices associated with network graphs : 
Incidence, cutset and circuit matrices. Properties of these matrices in terms of the properties of the underlying graph. Use of such matrices for the detailed study of Kirchhoff"s current and voltage equations and thence for developing methods of analysis of linear networks. Nodal, cutset, mesh and loop circuit analysis. 
2-port network, 2-port parameters, Inter-connections of 2-ports and their effect on the parameters.
Multi-terminal networks and indefinite admittance matrix.

Multiports.


Elements of filter theory : 
Butterworth and Chebychev approximations. 
;;N. Balabanian & T.A. Bickart : Electrical Network Theory, John Wiley, 1969. 
V.K. Aatre, Network Theory and Filter Design, Wiley, 1980. 
;;
EE 203;Band structure of semiconductors, Electron and Hole distribution, Current transport in semiconductors and concepts about mobility, Diffusivity and recombination, The continuity equation and its solution, P-N junction : I-V and C-V characteristics, Charge control equation and transient response.

Types of P-N junction diodes, Diode circuits : 
Rectifiers, Clipping and clamping circuits. 
Bipolar transistor : 
Ebers-Moll model and charge control model, Transient behaviour, Small signal equivalent circuit - h-parameter and hybrid-pai. 
Field effect transistors : 
JFET operation and I-V characteristics. MOS capacitor theory, MOSFET types. MOSFET operation and I-V characteristics and equivalent circuit. 
Metal-semiconductor junctions and MOSFET.
Introduction to technology of semiconductor devices and integrated circuits.

;;B.G. Strectman, Solid State Electronic Devices, Second Edition, 1986, Prentice Hall (India) Ltd. 
D. Nagchoudhari, Semiconductor Devices, Tata Mc-Graw Hill, 1989. 
E.S. Yang, Microelectronics Devices, McGraw Hill International Edition, 1988. 
;;
EE 204;Biasing of discrete devices and integrated circuits, Low frequency amplifiers, Feedback amplifiers, Frequency response of amplifiers and high frequency effects, Internal stages of OPAMP Difference amplifier, Intermediate stage amplifier, Level shifter, Output buffer, Linear applications of OPAMP, Non-Linear applications of OPAMPS, Wave generation with OPAMP, Active filters, Oscillators, Regulators, Power amplifiers.;EE 201, EE 203;J. Millman and A. Grabel, Microelectronics, McGraw Hill, 1987. 
;;
EE 206;Basics of Boolean Algebra and Minimization Techniques. Combinational and sequential circuits. Introduction to finite state machine concept. Bipolar logic families : DTL, TTLs, ECL, I squared L. MOS logic families : NMOS (EE and ED) and CMOS. Basic digital circuits : Shift register and Flip-flops and counters. Semiconductor memories. logic implementation on ROM, PAL, PLA and Gate Array. Wave generation using gates. Timing circuits. Arithmetic systems.;;H.Taub and D. Schilling , Digital Integrated Electronics, McGraw Hill, 1977. 
D.A. Hodges and H.G. Jackson, Analysis and Design of Digital Integrated Circuits, International Student Edition, McGraw Hill, 1983. 
F.J. Hill and G.L. Patterson, Switching Theory and Logic Design, 3rd Ed., John Wiley, 1981. ;;
EE 208;Electrostatic fields in free space, conductors and dielectrics - Solution of Laplace"s and Poisson"s equations, Boundary value Maxwell stress.
Steady currents in conductors and continuity equation, electromotive force, Ohm"s law, Resistance and Joule losses, Boundary value problems in steady current flow.

Magnetostatic fields in free space and magnetic materials, Magnetic scalar and vector potentials, Boundary value problems in magnetostatics.

Electromagnetic induction and Faraday"s law, static and moving frames, Role of surface charges, Induced e.m.f. and terminal voltage, voltmeter reading, Energy in the magnetic field and magnetic force, Maxwell"s equations, Poynting vector, Relation between field theory and circuit theory.

;;M.A. Wazed Miah, Fundamentals of Electromagnetics, Tata McGraw Hill, 1982. 
R. Plonsey and R.E. Collin, Principles and Applications of Electromagnetic Fields, Tata McGraw Hill, 1974. 
W.K.H. Panofsky and M. Phillips, Classical Electricity and Magnetism, India Book Co., 1970. 
;;
EE 212;RC coupled amplifiers with and without feedback. Difference amplifier response using array of transistors on a chip. Measurement of OPAMP parameters. Simple applications of OPAMP like inverting, non-inverting and buffer amplifiers and their frequency response; Differentiator, inverting and non-inverting type integrators.

Non-linear applications of OPAMP : 
Precision limiters, logarithmic multipliers, comparators, Schmitt trigger etc. 
Waveform generation : 
Using IC 555, OPAMPs and Gates. 
Oscillators : 
Sinusoidal oscillators, Twin-T and Twin-delta, phase shift, Wien bridge etc. 
Filters : 
Active filters like low pass, Band pass, High pass, Band reject and all pass types. 
Filters based on simulated inductances.;;;;
EE 213;Experiments be planned to explain the basic operation of semiconductor devices like Diodes and Transistors. 

They will include topics like : 
Circuit applications of diodes, Measurement of minority carrier lifetime in semiconductors. Reversed biased C-V characteristics of P-N junction. Computer aided measurement of I-V characteristics of diodes. Small signal characteristics of bipolar and FETs. 
;;;;
EE 301;Transmission line equations. Impedance of loaded and unloaded transmission lines. Reflections and VSWR. Smith chart and its use in impedance matching and other transmission line problems.
Propagation of electromagnetic waves in different media. Reflection and refraction at different boundaries. Total reflection and polarizing angle. Ground wave and sky wave propagation.

Parallel plane and rectangular waveguides. Attenuation in wave guides.

Radiation of electromagnetic waves. Dipole and array of dipoles for medium wave and short wave transmission.

;;E.C. Jordon and E.G. Balmain, Electro-magnetic Waves and Radiation Systems, Prentice Hall India, 1986. 
;;
EE 302;Basic concepts of open loop and closed loop control. System modelling, block diagrams, signal flow graphs, transfer function, and state space representation.

Concepts of controllability, observability, minimality, stability, and sensitivity.

Time domain and frequency domain analysis of control systems.

Stability analysis using Routh-Hurwitz, Nyquist and root locus methods, phase margin, Gain margin.

Compensator design using frequency domain and time domain methods like root locus, Bode plots, pole placement in time and frequency domain. Asymptotic observers.

;EE 307;I.J. Nagrath and M. Gopal, Control Systems Engg., 2nd Ed., Wiley Eastern, New Delhi, 1982. 
B.C. Kuo, Automatic Control Systems, 4th Ed., Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi, 1985. 
G.F. Franklin, J.D. Powell, A. Emami-Naeini, Feedback Control of Dynamic Systems, Addison Wesley, 1986. 
;;
EE 303;Magnetic circuits : 
Self and mutual inductance, stored energy. Transformer principles, equivalent circuits, regulation and efficiency, three-phase transformers. Principles of electromechanical energy conversion-energy, co-energy, forces of electromagnetic origin, singly- and multiply-excited systems, permanent magnet devices. 
Elements of rotating electric machinery : 
mmf and flux waves. Speed and transformer e.m.f., commutator action. Torque production. Rotating magnetic fields. Basics principles of synchronous, induction and d.c. machines. 
;;A.F. Fitzgerld, C. Kingsley Jr. and S.D. Umans, Electric Machinery, McGraw Hill, 1983. 
I.J. Nagrath and D.P. Kothari, Electric Machines, Tata McGraw Hill, 1985. 
;;
EE 304;Introduction and basic concepts. Steady-state performance of transmission lines. System modelling and load-flow analysis. Economic dispatch. Symmetrical and un-symmetrical fault analysis. Transient stability. Load frequency control. Introduction to HVDC transmission.

;EE 303;W.D. Stevenson, Elements of Power System Analysis, 4th Ed., McGraw Hill, 1982. 
I.J. Nagrath and D.P. Kothari, Modern Power System Analysis, 2nd Ed., Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1989. 
O.I. Elgerd, Electric Energy Systems Theory : A Introduction, 2nd Ed., Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, l982. 
;;
EE 305;Principles of measurements and error analysis.

Electrical instruments : 
DC & AC voltage and current meters, power and energy meters, estimation of instrument ranges, potentiometers and bridges.
Amplifiers in instrumentation. Analog electronic instruments for V.I.Z,Q,P frequency and phase. Transconductance amplifiers and analog multiplier. Oscilloscopes and Recorders. 

Analog switches and Data Converters : 
V/F, F/V, A/D, D/A converters. Digital displays and instruments. 
Noise in Electronic Systems : 
Noise in passive devices, Design of low noise circuits, Grounding and shielding. Signal Measurement in the Presence of Noise. 
;;W.D.Cooper, `Electronic Instrumentation and Measurement Techniques Prentice Hall India Pvt. Ltd. New Delhi, 1982. 
A.J. Bowels, `Digital Instrumentation", McGraw Hill, 1986. 
S. Soclof, `Application of Analog Integrated Circuits", Prentice Hall of India, 1990. 
;;
EE 306;Synchronous machines : 
d-q transformation-steady-state phaser digrams. Power-angle diagram, Performance characteristics. Induction machines equivalent circuit. Torque-speed characteristics. Single-phase induction machines. 
D.C. machines, armature reaction, series, shunt and compound machines. Performance characteristics.
Dynamics of drive system - starting, braking and speed control-introduction to solid-state power control.

;;I.J. Nagrath and D.P. Kothani, Electric Machines, Tata McGraw Hill, 1985. 
S.K. Pillai, A First Course on Electrical Drives, Wiley Eastern, 1989. 
A.E. Fitzgerald, C. Kingsley Jr. and S.D. Umans, Electric Machinery, McGraw Hill, 1983. ;;
EE 307;Definitions and concepts of different types of signals. Elements of signal space theory, system as a mapping from I/P to O/P space. Concepts of linearity. Time invariance and causality. Classification of systems.

Impulse sequence, impulse functions and other singularity functions. 


Convolution : 
Convolution sum, convolution integral and their evaluation. Time-domain representation and analysis of LTI systems in terms of convolution-sum and integral.
Time domain representation of LTI systems in terms of differential and difference equations, classical methods of solutions of such equations. 

Multi input-multi output discrete and continuous systems, state model representation, solution of state equations, state transition matrix.


;EE 201;A. Papoulis, Circuit and Systems, Modern Approach, HRW, 1980. 
R.F. Ziemer, W.H. Trater and D.R. Fannin, Signals and Systems Continuous and Discrete, Macmillian, 1983. 
A.V. Oppenheim, A.S. Winsky and I.T. Young, Signals and Systems, Prentice Hall, 1983. 
;;
EE 308;Principles of analog modulation, modulation and demodulation of AM, DSBSC, SSB signals and their practical applications, FDM systems.

Principles of angle modulation, frequency and phase modulation, narrow and wide band FM, generation and demodulation of FM signals, phase locked loops, application of FM.

Samplingand quantization of band limited signals. Sampling theorem, pulse-amplitude and pulse-time modulation, PCM, DPCM and Delta modulation. TDM systems.

;EE 307;S.S. Haykin, An Introduction to Analog and Digital Communication Systems, Wiley Eastern, 1989. 
R.B. Carlson : Communication Systems (3rd Intl. Ed.), McGraw Hill, 1986. 
B.P. Lathi : Communication Systems, John Wiley, 1987. 
;;
EE 309;Basic concepts of Microprocessors. Architecture and programming of 8085A microprocessor. Programmable peripheral devices like 8255A, 8254, 8259, 8251, 8279, 8257 etc.
Introduction to 8086 microprocessor and 8087 numeric data processor.

Microprocessor applications.

;;A.P. Mathur, Introduction to Microprocessors, 3rd Ed., Tata McGraw Hill, 1989. 
I. Liu, G.A. Gibson, Microcomputer Systems : The 8086/8088 Family, 2nd Ed., Prentice Hall, 1986. 
R.S. Gaonkar, Microprocessor Architecture : Programming and Applications with the 8085/8080A, Wiley Eastern, 1990. 
;;
EE 312;(To Supplement EE 302 & EE 304 ) ;;;;
EE 313;Experiments based on following broad areas : 
Instrument amplifier, Voltmeter circuits, Waveform errors, Voltage to frequency converters, Digital to analog converters, Magnitude, Phase and frequency measurement using CRO, Bridges. 
;;;;
EE 401;Thermal noise, shot noise, noise in active devices, noise model, S/N ratio, noise temperature, noise figure, choices of source resistance to minimize noise figures.

Q-factor, various circuits for impedance transformation.


Small signals high frequency amplifiers : 
Two-port admittance, parameters, stability criteria, Linvill and Stern stability factor, neutralization, power gain, design choices, alignability, limitations of short circuit parameters scattering parameters, transducer power gain, stability criteria, stability circles on Smith chart.
Sine wave oscillators criteria for oscillation, negative resistance oscillators, Colpitts oscillator, crystal oscillators, frequency stability.

Mixers terminology, diode mixers, BJT and FET mixtures.


;EE 308;H.L. Krauss, C.W. Bostian and F.H. Raab, Solid State Radio Engineering, John Wiley, 1980. 
R.S. Carson, High Frequency Amplifiers, 2nd Ed., John Wiley, 1982. 
T.T. Ha, Solid State Microwave Amplifier Design, John Wiley, 1981. 
G.D. Vendelin and A.M. Pavio, Design of Microwave Amplifiers, Oscillators and Mixers by the S-parameter Method, 2nd Ed., John Wiley, 1989. 
;;
EE 403;Brief review of discrete-time signals and systems-linear shift invariant systems, stability and causality, frequency domain representation of discrete-time systems and signals.
Discrete Fourier transforms, computation of DFT, FFT algorithms.

Introduction to digital filters. Design techniques of IIR and FIR filters, finite precision effects, inverse filtering.

;;Roman Kuo, Introduction to Digital Signal Processing, McGraw Hill International Ed.,1988. 
V. Oppenhelm and R.W. Schafer, Digital Processing, Prentice Hall of India, 1988. 
A. Antoniou, Digital Filters - Analysis and Design, McGraw Hill, 1979. 
;;
EE 411;The laboratory work will closely parallel and supplement the theory presented in the course, Communication Electronics - EE 4401 and Electronic Instrumentation - EE 4403.;;;;
EE 415;Basic concepts of electrical machine design : Output equation, specific electric and magnetic loadings, separation of L and D, standard frame. Design of DC motors, servo motors, step motors, induction motors and transformers. Computer aided design of electrical machines.;;A.K. Sawhney, A Course in Electrical Machine Design, Delhi, Dhanpatrai and Sons, 1988. 
S.K. Sen, Principles of Electrical Machine Design with Computer Programmes, Oxford & IBH Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd., 1987. ;;
EE 421;Spectral Analysis, Sampling and Fourier transform, random variables and processes, mathematical representation of signal and noise. Comparative study of modulation techniques on S/N ratio basis.

;EE 306;H. Taub & D.L. Shilling, Principles of Comm. Systems, McGraw Hill Intl, student Edition 1971. 
M. Schwartz, Information Transmission, modulation and noise, McGraw Hill 1980. 
;;
EE 423;Instrumentation an isolation amplifiers. Analog switches, S/H circuits, multiplexer and demultiplexer, sampling and quantization, antialiasing filters, Data converters, V/F, F/V, A/D, D/A conversion. Data acquisition system. Signal measurement in the presence of noise. Noise in Electronic systems, design instruments and digital interfacing; serial, parallel, GPIB.;;B.H. Oliver and J.M. Cage, Electronic Measurements and Instrumentation, McGraw Hill 1971. 
J.A. Alloca, Electronic Instrumentation, Prentice Hall, 1987. 
S. Soclof, Applications of Analog Integrated Circuits, Prentice Hall, India, 1990 
A.J. Bowels, Digital Instrumentation, McGraw Hill, 1986. 
C.S. Rangan, G.R. Sarma, V.S.V. Mani, Instrumentation Devices and Systems, Tata McGraw Hill, 1990.;;
EE 425;Unit processes for intergrated circuits fabrication : 
Crystal growth, Substrate preparation, oxidation diffusion, photo-lithography, Iron-implantation, Expitaxy for silicon, Chemical vapour deposition techniques and metallisation, MOS transfer theory, NMOS technologies, Inverter design, Design rules, sticks diagram, General design methodologies, Elements of various types of simulators. 
;EE 206;A.B. Glaser and G.E.S. Sharpe, Integrated Circuit Engineering, Addision Wesly, 1977. 
C. Maad and L. Conway, Introduction to VLSI Systems, Addition Wesley, 1979. 
S.K. Gandhi, VLSI Fabrication Principles, John Wiley and Sons, 1983. 
N. Wasle and K. Eshranghian, Principles of CMOS VLSI Design, Addision Wesley, 1985. 
;;
EE 427;Thyristor, triac, firing control circuit. Device application practices. Basic rectifier circuits, centre tap, bridge rectifiers, rectifier application, supplies and loads. Inverter, naturally commutated inverter and regulators. Capacitor turnoff. Chopper regulators and series inverters-parallel-capacitor commutated inverters.;;G.De. Principles of Thyristorised Converters, Oxford, IBH Publ. Co., lst Ed. Reprint 1985. 
;;
EE 429;Sampling and data reconstruction processes. Ideal sampler, sampling theorem, zero order holds.


Z-transforms : 
Theorem evaluation Jury"s criteria. Design of DD systems. Stepper motors and motor controllers and stepper motor control systems. Applications, NC systems, peripherals. 
;EE 302;B.C. Kuo. Discrete Data Control Systems, Science-Tech., 1974. 
M. Gopal, Digital Control Engineering, Wiley Eastern, 1988. 
G.F. Franklin and J.D. Powell, Digital Control of Dynamic Systems, Addison-Wesley, 1980. 
;;
EE 431;Engineering economics : 
General principles, specific problems of economic choice. Bulkpower transmission lines, economic choice of conduct or size, optimum loading thermal loading and other constraints. Substations : Bus-bar schemes, outdoor/Indoor stations, clearances, layout of apparatus. Sub-station design : Data required, constraints, schematic layouts, checks and final choice, recent developments. 
;EE 304;B.G.A. Skrotzki and W.A. Vopat, Power Plant Engineering and Economics, McGraw Hill,1972. 
B. Jones, New Approaches to Design and Economics of EHV Transmission Plant, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1972. 
R.L. Giles, Layout of EHV Substations, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1972. 
T. Gonen, Electric Power Distribution System Engineering, McGraw Hill, 1986. 
;;
EE 433;Instrumentation and isolation amplifiers. Analog switches, S/H circuits, multiplexer and demultiplexer, sampling and quantization, antialiasing filters, Data converters, V/F, F/V, A/D, D/A conversion. Data acquisition system. Signal measurement in the presence of low noise circuits, programmable instruments and digital interfacing : serial, parallel, GPIB.;;B.H. Oliver and J.M. Cage, Electronic Measurement and Instrumentation, McGraw Hill, 1971. 
J.A. Alloca, Electronic Instrumentation, Prentice Hall, 1987. 
S. Soclof, Applications of Analog Integrated Circuits, Prentice Hall, India, 1990 
A.J. Bowels, Digital Instrumentation, McGraw-Hill, 1986. 
C.S. Rangan, G.R. Sarma, V.S.V. Mani, Instrumentation Devices and Systems, Tata McGraw Hill, 1990. ;;
EE 601;Review of probability theory and random variables. Transformation (function) of random variables. Conditional expectation. sequence of random variables, convergence of sequence of random variables. 
stochastic processes : wide sense stationary process, orthogonal increment process, Wiener process, and the Poisson process, KL expansion, ergodicity. Mean square continuity, mean square derivative and mean square integral of stochastic processes. 

Stochastic systems : response of linear dynamic systems (e.g. 

state space or ARMA systems) to stochastic inputs, Lyapunov equations, correlational function, power spectral density function, introduction to linear least square estimation, Wiener filtering and Kalman filtering. 

;;1. A. Papoulis: `Probability, Random Variables and stochastic processes", 2nd Ed., McGraw Hill, 1983. 
2. A. Larson and B.O. Schubert: `Stochastic Processes", Vol.I and II, Holden-Day, 1979. 
3. W. Gardener: `Stochastic Processes", McGraw Hill, 1986. 
;;
EE 602;Radar theory, different types of radars, Radar signal analysis for range accuracy and resolution. Radar signal detection and estimation techniques, clutter and noise suppression, propogational characteristics over land and sea. Electronic counter measure. ;;M.I. Skolnik, Introduction to radar systems, McGraw Hill, 1980. 
D.K. Barton, Modern radar systems analysis, Artech House, 1988. 
B.Edde, Radar: Principles, technology, applications, Prentice Hall, 1993. ;;
EE 603; Discrete time signals, sequences, representation of signals on orthogonal basis. Discrete systems, z-transforms, Fast Fourier transform. Fast convolution and correlation. Non-sinusoidal orthogonal sequences, Walsh Hadamard transforms, Haar transform. 
Design of digital filters : Butterworth, Chebychev, elliptic etc. IIR and FIR filters. Effect of finite register length in filter design, Parametric and non-parametric spectral estimation. Application of DSP to speech and radar signal processing. 

;;1. A.V. Oppenheim & R.W. Schafer: `Discrete-time signal processing", Prentice Hall, 1989. 
2. A.V. Oppenheim & R.W. Schafer: `Digital signal processing", Prentice Hall, 1975. 
3. L.R. Rabiner and B. Gold :`Theory and application of digital signal processing, Prentice Hall, India 1992. 
4. Johnny R. Johnson : `Introduction to Digital signal Processing", Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd., 1992. 
;;
EE 605;Linear block codes : systematic linear codes and optimum decoding for the binary symmetric channel. The generator and parity check matrices, syndrome decoding on symmetric channels, Hamming codes, weight enumerators and the MacWilliams indentities, perfect codes. 
Introduction to finite fields and finite rings, factorization of Pn - l over a finite field. Cyclic Codes. 

BCH codes, idempotents and Mattson-Solomon polynomials, Reed-Solomon codes, Justeen codes, MDS codes, Alterant, Goppa and generalized BCH codes, spectral properties of cyclic codes. 

Decoding of BCH codes, Berlekamp"s decoding algorithm, Massey"s minimum shift register synthesis technique and its relation to Berlekamp"s algorithm. A fast Berlekamp Massey algorithm. 

Convolution codes, Wozencraft"s sequential decoding algorithm, Fann"s algorithm and other sequential decoding algorithms, Viterbi decoding algorithm. 

;;F.J. MacWilliams and N.J.A. Slone, The theory of error correcting codes, North Holland, 1977. 
R.E. Balahut, Theory and practice of error control codes, Addison Wesley, 1983. 
;;
EE 607;System standards, electron optics, camera tubes, picture tubes (B/W and colour), TV transmission, colour bar signals, quadrature modulation and demodulation. Distortion, deflection coils, field deflection, line deflection, synchronization. ;;G.M. Glasford, Fundamentals of TV Engineering, McGraw Hill, 1955. 
G.H. Hutson, Colour television theory , McGraw Hill, 1971. 
J.W. Wentworth, Colour television engineering, McGraw Hill, 1955. 
Digital Video, Vol.l 1977, Vol.2 1979 and Vol.3 1980, SM PTE books. 
R.H. Stanfford, Digital television bandwidth reduction and communication aspects, John Wiley and Sons, 1980. 
Philips Data Handbook on Picture Tube and Components. 
A. Bockhorstard and J. Stolk, Television deflection system,, Philips Technical Library., 1962. 
G.N. Patchett, Colour television with particular reference to the PAL system, Norman Press, 1978. 
J.S. Zarach and N.M. Morris, Television principle and practice, McMillian, 1979. 
S.W. Amos, Radio TV and audio technical reference book, Butterworth, 1977. 
K.B. Benson, Television Engineering Handbook McGraw Hill, 1986. 
Ted Rzeszewski, Colour Television, IEEE Press, 1983. 
Ted Rzeszewski, Television Technology Today, IEEE Press, 1984. 
;;
EE 608;Review of basic linear and non-linear estimation theory, signal modelling, optimal filtering basics. Adaptive filtering as an extension of the optimal least mean square error case, adaptive algorithms, adaptive equilization and echo cancellation adaptive lattice filters, application to radar, solar, geophysics and hydrology, economic processes, communications (spread spectrum techniques). ;;1. S. Haykin: `Adaptive filter theory", Prentice Hall, 1986. 
2. B. Widrow and S.D. Stearns: `Adaptive signal processing", Prentice Hall, 1984. 
;;
EE 609;Review of antenna theory, dipoles, monopole and loop antennas, linear and planar arrays, array synthesis, phased arrays, helical antennas, radiation from apertures, aperture distribution, horn and parabolic dish antennas, Yagi - Uda and log-periodic antennas, microstrip antennas and arrays, Dielectric Antennas. 
;;1. J.D. Karus: `Antennas", McGraw Hill, 1988. 
2. C.A. Balanis: `Antenna Theory - Analysis and design", John wiley, 1982. 
3. R.E. Collin: `Antennas and radio wave propagation", McGraw Hill, 1985. 
4. R.C. Johnson and H. Jasik: `Antenna Engineering Handbook", McGraw Hill, 1984. 
5. I.J. Bahl and P. Bhartia: `Microstrip antennas", Artech house, 1980.;;
EE 610; Image representation, basics of colorimetry, KL transforms, two dimensional transforms, image enhancement, edge detection, histograms. Image restoration : sources and models of image degradation, point spread functions (psf), stochastic psf, noise in images. Formulation of image restoration problem least square, minimum mean square error (MMSE) and homomorphic filter restoration, linear and non-linear restoration techniques. 
Mathematical morphology, computer tomography. 

;;1. W.K. Pratt: `Digital image processing", Prentice Hall, 1978. 
2. A. Rosenfold and A.C. Kak: `Digital image processing", Academic Press, 1976. 
3. A. Rosenfold and A.C. Kak: `Digital image processing", Vols 1 and 2, Prentice Hall, 1986. 
4. H.C. Andrew and B.R. Hunt, Digital image restoration, Prentice Hall, 1977. 
5. K.R. Castleman: `Digital image processing", Prentice Hall, 1979. 
6. A.K. Jain: `Fundamentals of digital image processing", Prentice Hall, 1989. ;;
EE 611;Introduction, Analysis of microstriplines, variational methods, conformal transformation, Numerical analysis, Losses in microstriplines, Slot line. Coupled lines, Design of directional couplers, hybrid couplers, filters, circulators. 
Microstriplines with ferrite and garnet substrates. Lumped elements in MICs, Technology of MICs, Monolithic hybrid substrates, Thin and thick film techniques, computer aided design. 
;;1. Leo Young and H. Sobol, Ed. Advances in Microwaves, Vol.2, Academic Press Inc., 1974. 
2. B.Bhat and S. Koul, stripline-like transmission lines for MICs, John wiley, 1989. ;;
EE 612;Communication networks, subscriber loops, Theory of delog and lost calls, digital switching, digital modulation, signalling, synchronization, protocols, traffic analysis, ISDN. ;;J. Bellamy, Digital telephony, (2nd Edn.) John Wiley N.Y. 1991. 
J.C. McDonald, Fundamentals of digital switching, (2nd Edn.) Plenum Press, 1989. 
M. Schwartz, Telecommunication networks, Protocols, Modelling and analysis, Addison Wesloy, 1987. ;;
EE 614;Amplifiers - Power gain equations, stability, impedance matching, constant gain and noise figure circles. Small signal, low noise, high-power and broadband amplifier design. 
Oscillators - One port, two port, YIG dielectric and Gunn-diode oscillators. 

PIN diodes and uses as switches, phase shifters and limiters, varactor diodes, IMPATT and TRAPATT devices, transferred electron devices, Microwave BJTs. GaAs FETs, low noise and power GaAs FETs and their applications, Microwave Mixers. 

;;H.A. Watson, Microwave semiconductor devices and their circuit applications, McGraw Hill, 1969. 
S.Y. Liao, Microwave circuit analysis and amplifier design, Prentice Hall, 1987. 
G.D. Vendelin, A.M. Pavio, U.L. Rohde, Microwave circuit design, using linear and non-linear techniques, John Wiley, 1990. 
Y. Konishi, Microwave Integrated Circuits, Marcel Dekker, 1991. ;;
EE 623;Introduction to nonlinearities and nonlinear phenomena. 
Phase plane method : Methods of plotting phase trajectories, analysis of singular points and limit cycles. 

Describing function method, definition and derivation of describing functions; stability analysis. Dual input describing functions, subharmonics and jump resonance. 

Lyapunov"s first and second methods. Generation of Lyapunov functions. Application to linear and nonlinear systems, relative stability. 

Lure"s problem. Popov"s method. Circle criterion and its applications. BIBO stability, functional analysis. Exact methods of relay control system analysis, Hamel and Tsypkin loci. 

;;J.C. Hsu and A.U. Meyer, Modern control principles and applications, McGraw-Hill, 1968. 
D.P. Atherton, Nonlinear control systems, Van Nostrand, 1975. 
M. Vidyasagar, Nonlinear systems, Prentice-Hall, 1978. 
J.M. Holtzman, Nonlinear system theory : Functional analysis approach, Prentice-Hall, 1970. 
;;
EE 624;Basic concepts and classification. Identification techniques; impulse response identification, parameter estimation, learning model approach. 
Adaptive control design : Nodal reference adaptive control, input signal adaptive control. Practical application, adaptive autopilot, etc. 

Self tuning regulators. 
;;P. Eykhoff, System identification, Wiley, 1974. 
I.D. Landau, Adaptive control, Marcel and Dekker, 1979. 
K.S. Narendra and R.V. Monopoli, Methods and application of adaptive control, Academic Press, 1980. 
;;
EE 627;Transducer characteristics, step response, second order equation. 
Errors, feedback transducers. Transducers for measurement of displacement, velocity, acceleration, pressure, strain, flow, temperature, etc. Frequency transducers. 

Transducer bridge, quadrature circuits, signal conditioning. 

Digital readouts. 

;;Neubert, Transducers in instrumentation, Pergamon Press, 1975. 
;;
EE 629;Brief introduction to human physiology. Biomedical transducers: displacement, velocity, force, acceleration, flow, temperature, potential, dissolved ions and gases. 
Bioelectrodes and biopotential amplifiers for ECG, EMG, EEG, etc. 

Measurement of blood temperature, pressure and flow. Impedance plethysmography. Ultrasonic and nuclear imaging. 

Prostheses and aids: pacemakers, defibrilla-tors, heart-lung machine, artificial kidney, aids for the handicapped. Safety aspects. 

;;W.F. Ganong, Review of medical physiology, 8th Asian Ed, Medical Publishers, 1977. 
J.G. Webster, ed., Medical Instrumentation, Houghton Mifflin, 1978. 
A.M. Cook and J.G. Webster, eds., Therapeutic Medical Devices, Prentice-Hall, 1982. 
;;
MM 612;Introduction to industrial polymers. Structure-property correlated with respect to mechanical and thermal properties. Raw materials for industrial and thermal properties. Raw materials for industrial polymers and the manufacturing techniques. 

Processing techniques like melt and dry blending, extrusion, injection and blow molding, dough and sheet molding. Modern quality control techniques. Processing effects on structure, property and performance, and role of reinforcement fillers, coupling agents, plasticizers antidegradants, pigments etc. 

Applications of Polymers - case studies. 

;Nil;H.Ulrich, Introduction to Industrial Polymers, Muchen Hanser Publ., 1982. 
R.B.Seymour, High Performance Polymers, Elsevier N.Y., 1986. 
W.V.Titow, Reinforced Thermoplastics, Appl. Science Publ. London, 1975. 
D.R.Paul and S.Newman, Polymer Blends, Academic Press, N.Y., 1978. 
;;
EE 630; Time measurement techniques : Time standards, crystal oscillators, measurement of time interval between events, period, frequency, time constant, Q, phase; events counting and sequencing, peak/valley recorders. 
Frequency measurement techniques : Frequency ratio, frequency multiplication/division, time reciprocating technique for low frequency and speed measurements. 

Voltage-ratio measurement technique : Measurement of impedance -magnitude, frequency, Q, tan - delta, power factor, modulation-index, overshoot, instrument transformer errors, etc. 

A/D and D/A converters and their design considerations, D/A converter based on charge transfer principle. 

New sampling theory and its applications in current, voltage , power and energy measurements. 

Elements of digital signal processing and filtering : Walsh, Fourier and Hartley transforms, spectrum analysers. 

;;H. Taub and B. Schilling, Digital integrated electronics, McGraw-Hill, 1977. 
B.S. Sonde, Monographs on system design using integrated circuits, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1974. 
W.D. Cooper and A.D. Helfrick, Electronic instrumentation and measurement techniques, Prentice-Hall, 1986. 
A.J. Bouwens, Digital instrumentation, McGraw-Hill, 1986. 
Current papers from various research journals. 
;;
EE 631;Approximation theory. Network transformations, network function decomposition. 
Active elements : Operational amplifiers, NIC, gyrator controlled sources. 

Active RC filter design : Use of finite and infinite gain amplifiers and biquads. 

State space approach, multiple feedback design, two integrator loop and high order filter design. Design based on impedance converters. 

High frequency filter design : High frequency characteristics of op-amps. Single pole roll-off model. Compensated filter design. 

Active R and C filters. Switched capacitor filters. 

;;G. Daryanani, Principles of active network synthesis and design, John Wiley, 1976. 
S.K. Mitra, Active inductorless filters, IEEE Press, 197l. 
L.P. Huelsman, Active RC-filters, theory and application, Dowden, Hutchington and Ross, 1976. 
;;
EE 633;Circuit theory background : Graph theory, circuit matrices, their properties and interrelations. KCL and KVL in terms of circuit matrices. Formulation of network equations. Tellegen"s theorem and adjoint network. Circuit algorithms and use in sparse tableau analysis, modified nodal analysis, decomposition methods. Methods of development of circuit simulator for DC analysis, transient analysis and sensitivity analysis. ;;L.O. Chua and P.M. Lin, Computer aided analysis and electronic circuits, Prentice-Hall, 1975. 
Computer design aids for VLSI circuits, NATO Advance Science series E, Applied Science No.48, 1980. 
;;
EE 635;Vector spaces, linear dependence, basis. Representation of linear transformations with respect to a basis. 
Inner product spaces, Hilbert spaces, linear functions, the Riesz representation theorem and adjoints. 

Orthogonal projections, products of projections, orthogonal direct sums. Unitary and orthogonal transformations, complete orthonormal sets and Parseval"s identity. Closed subspaces and the projection theorem for Hilbert spaces. 

Polynomials. The algebra of polynomials, matrix polynomials, annihilating polynomials and invariant subspaces, Jordan forms. 

Applications : Complementary orthogonal spaces in networks, properties of graphs and their relation to vector space properties of their matrix representations. Solution of state equations in linear system theory. Relation between the rational and Jordan forms. 

Numerical linear algebra : Direct and iterative methods of solutions of linear equations. Matrices, norms, complete metric spaces and complete normal linear spaces (Banach spaces). Least squares problems (constrained and unconstrained). Eigenvalue problem. 
;;K. Hoffman and R. Kunze, Linear algebra, Prentice-Hall. 

G.H. Golub and C.F. Van Loan, Matrix computations, North Oxford Academic, 1983. 
G. Bachman and L. Narici, Functional analysis, Academic Press, 1966. 
Erwin Kreyszig, Introductory functional analysis with applications, John Wiley, 1978. 
;;
EE 637;Introduction to computers. Computer organization, functional blocks, ALU, control unit I/O and memory. Introduction to microprocessors. Organization of 8085A microprocessor. 

Introduction set and programming principles. Microcomputer system and address decoding principle. Microcontroller systems. 

Microprocessor support chips : 8255A, 8253, 8259, 8251A, 8279 etc. 

Introduction to 16-bit microprocessors and support chips. 

Multiprocessor systems. Microprocessor selection and product development. Some case studies.
;CS 201;A. Osborne, Introduction to Microprocessors, Vol.l-3, Osborne, McGraw Hill, 1978. 
A.P. Mathur, Introduction to Microprocessors 2nd Ed.,Tata McGraw Hill, 1984. 
I. Ahson, Microprocessors, Prentice Hall of India, 1984. 
;;
EE 638;Introduction to linear least square estimation : a geometric approach. 
Wiener filter, Levinson filter, updating QR filter and the Kalman filter. 

Filter implementation structures : Lattice, ladder and the systolic QR. Stochastic realization theory (modelling given the covariance). Modelling given the raw data. Spectral estimation. 

Recursive least squares identification algorithms : Levinson-type, Kalman-type and the QR-type. 

;;U.B. Desai, Lecture notes on estimation realization and identification, Unpublished, 1986. 
B.D.O. Anderson and J.B. Moore, Optimal filtering, Prentice-Hall, 1979. 
T. Kailath, Lecture notes on Wiener and Kalman filtering, Springer Verlag, 1980. 
L. Ljung, System identification theory for the user, Prentice-Hall, 1987. 
P.S. Maybeck, Stochastic models, estimation and control, Vols.1-3, Academic Press, 1980-1982. ;;
EE 639;Lab based on EE 637. Course must be taken together with EE 637. 
;;;;
EE 640;Multivariable system models, solution of state equations, canonical forms, polynomial matrices, transmission zeros. 
Multivariable system analysis : Solution of state equations, controllability, observability, stability, stabilizability. 

Observer theory. Realization of transfer matrices. Minimal realization. 

Multivariable system design : Pole placement, decoupling, model matching, inverse Nyquist array, characteristic locus methods. 
;;Y.S. Apte, Linear multivariable control systems, Tata McGraw-Hill, 198l. 

H.H. Rosenbrock, Computer aided control system design,, Academic Press, 1974. 
D.H. Owens, Feedback and multivariable systems, Peter Peregrinus, 1978. 
W.M. Wonham, Multivariable control, 2nd Ed. Springer Verlag, 1979. 
F. Fallside, Control system design by pole zero assignment, Academic Press, 1977. 
;;
EE 641;Principles of the Unified Machine Theory. The primitive rotating machine - Performance calculations of direct current machines and their speed control. 
Single and polyphase machines -Transformation Methods - Stationary and rotating reference frames - Analysis of alternating current drives - Speed control systems - Space vector methods in a.c. machines - Principle of field orientation as applied to a.c. machines. 
;;P.C.Krause : Analysis of Electric Machinery, McGraw Hill, New York 1987. 
C.V.Jones: The Unified Theory of Electrical Machines, Butterworths, London, 1967. 
;;
EE 642;Experiments based on EE 644: Inverters 
;;;;
EE 643;Methods of d.c. motor control, non-regenerative controlled rectifiers, fully controlled converters, field control, regenerative and non-regenerative field control, switching systems for d.c. motors. d.c. chopper regulators, aspects of analysis, performance and stability of variable speed d.c. drives. 
Induction motor control systems, a.c. regulators and static switches, control of effective rotor resistance, recovery of slip energy, variable frequency control of a.c. motors, cycloconverter control of slip frequency, forced commutated inverter drives, analysis, performance and stability of synchronous and asynchronous drives. 
;;W.Leonhard, Control of Electrical drives, Springer verlag, 1985. 
P. Vyas, Vector Control of AC machines, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1990 
S.K.Pillai, Analysis of Thyristor Power Conditioned Motors, University Press, 1992 
;;
EE 644;Basic configurations, load circuit analysis, voltage source inverters, current source inverters, load commutation, forced commutation, transistorized inverters, shaping and control of output voltage and current. ;;C.W. Lander; `Power Electronics", Mc Graw-Hill Book Company, London, 1993. 
M.H. Rashid; `Power Electronics", Prentics-Hall of India, New Delhi, 1994 
N. Mohan, T.M. Undeland and W.P. Robbins; `Power Electronics, Converters, Applications and Design, John Wiley and Sons, 1989. 
G.K. Dubey, S.R. Doradla, A.Joshi, R.M.K. Sinha; `Thyri-Storised Power Controllers", Wiley Eastern Ltd., New Delhi, 1993.;;
EE 661;Review of quantum mechanics. Motion of electronics in a periodic lattice. Band theory of solids, effective mass, holes. 
Statistics of carriers in semiconductors. Life time and recombination theory. Boltzmann transport equation. Carrier transport in semiconductors, including high-field effects. p-n junction theory. Excess currents and breakdown in p-n junctions. 

Biopolar transistors. Ebers-Moll and small signal models. 

Switching characteristics. Non-uniformly doped transistors. High current and high frequency effects. 

;;1. J.L. Moll, Physics of Semiconductors, McGraw Hill, 1964. 
2. F.F.Y.Wang, Introduction to solid-state electronics, North Holland, 1980. 
3. S.M. Sze, Physics of semiconductor devices (2nd ed.), Wiley Eastern, 1981. 
4. D.J. Roulston, Bipolar semiconductor devices, McGraw Hill, 1990. 
5. R.L. Pritchnard, Electrical Characteristics of Transistors, McGraw Hill, 1967.;;
EE 665;Overview of semiconductor processing, clean room and safety requirements, wafer cleaning. 
Mask making and photolithography. 

Wet and dry etching. 

Impurity diffusion; solution of diffusion equation, anomalous diffusion and emitter push effect, modelling of diffusion phenomena, technological processes for diffusion, characterisation of diffused layers, process simulation of diffusion in silicon. 

Ion implantation: principles, techniques and applications, removal of implant damage. 

Oxidation : Procedures for oxidation of silicon, kinetics of oxidation, Deal-Grove model and refinements of this model, impurity redistribution during oxidation, local oxidation, evaluation of oxide layers, ellipsometry. 

Epitaxy : technological procedures, modeling, redistribution of impurities during epitaxy, evaluation of epitaxial layers chemical vapour deposition and LPCVD of poly silicon, oxide and nitride layers. Metallisation and multilayers interconnects. 

Complete process flows for CMOS, NMOS and bipolar technologies.
;;1. S.K. Ghandi, VLSI fabrication principles, Wiley 1983. 
2. S.M. Sze ed. VLSI technology, 2nd edition, McGraw Hill, 1988. 
3. W.R. Runyan, Silicon semiconductor Technology, McGraw Hill, 1970. ;;
EE 667;Advanced logic families : CMOS, BiCMOS and TTL. Power dissipation, noise and ESD issues. Basic system design aspects such as power distribution, clock distribution, signal connections, signal quality, synchronous and asynchronous design features and multilayer PCB design. Interfaces between devices, boards and units. Transient switching problems and worst case timings. Noise tolerant design. Memory based subsystem design. FPGA and PLD based designs. Microcontrollers (8 bit and 16 bit) and their applications. Analog design issues. some examples of real life system design. ;;James E. Buchanan, "BICMOS-CMOS System Design" McGraw Hill International Edition 1991. 
James E. Buchanan, "CMOS-TTL System Design" McGraw Hill International Edition 1990. 
John P. Hayes, "Digital system Design and Microprocessors", McGraw Hill International Edition 1985. 
Darryl Lindsay, "Digital PCB design and drafting" Bishop Graphics 1986. 
Intel corporation, "8 bit embedded controller Handbook" Intel Publication # 270645-001, 1987. 
Intel Corporation, "16 bit embedded controller Handbook" Intel Publication # 270646-003, 1991. 
Xilinx Corporation, "FPGA technology for Nineties" Xilinx Handbook, 1992. 
;;
EE 666;Theory of bipolar and MOS transistors. Small-signal models of bipolar and MOS transistors, Gummel-Poon model. High current effects in diodes. Dependence of lifetime on high-level injection. Non-uniform current distribution under high current injection. Onset of high-current effects in transistors. 
Theories of Kirk effect, crowding, pinch-in effects, second breakdown, etc. Emitter geometries for high current and HF operation. SCR : Theories of operation, relation between shorted emitter and dv/dt ratings, gate turn-off devices, inverter grade SCRs, special diffusion techniques for SCRs. Heat transfer in power devices. Thick film technology, power VMOS devices. 
;;S.M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 2nd ed., Wiley, 1981. 
;;
EE 668;Physics of bipolar and MOS integrated transistors. The planar silicon process. Integrated circuit resistors and capacitors. 
Parasitic effects in integrated circuits. Layout and design criteria. Stick diagrams. Linear integrated circuits : bipolar and all-MOS OPAMAS. Digital integrated circuits : TTL and MOS logic. 

Design of LSI and VLSI digital circuits in MOS and CMOS. Lambda-based design rules. PLA design, dRAM and sRAM design. Output buffers. 

Gate array and standard cell design. Economics of IC design. 

Computer-aided-design systems. Typical examples of MOS LSI design. 
;;W. Glaser and G.E. Subak-Sharpe, Integrated circuit engineering, Addison-Wesley, 1977. 
C. Mead and L. Conway, Introduction to VLSI systems, Addison-Wesley, 1979. 
N. Weste and K. Eshraghian, Principles of CMOS VLSI design, Addison-Wesley, 1985. 
A. Mukherjee, Introduction to nMOS and CMOS VLSI systems design, Prentice Hall, 1986. ;;
EE 670;Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution of electrons in plasma. Mean free path and collision frequencies of electrons with heavy particles. 
Mobilities and diffusion of charge carriers in plasma. 

Ionization and deionization processes in the plasma : Townsend"s coefficients. Breakdown of gases. Langmuir"s probe theory. 

Plasma oscillations. 

Debye length. Interaction of RF waves in lossy and nonlossy plasmas. Elements of wave electronics. Interactions in plasma in the presence of magnetic fields. 

;;J.L. Delcroix, Plasma in Physics, Wiley, 1965. 
C.L. Hemenway, R.W. Henry and M. Caulton, Physical Electronics, Wiley, 1967. 
J.A. Ratcliffe, The magneto ionic theory, Cambridge University Press, 1959. 
L.B. Loeb, Basic processes in gaseous electronics, University of California Press, 1965. 
;;
EE 672;Laboratory experiments on technology, characterization, design and simulation of devices and integrated circuits, based on courses EE 633, 661, 662, 665, 668 and 674. Fabrication of MOS capacitors and junction diodes. 
Characterization of MOS capacitors by C-V and I-V. Characterization of photovoltaic cells. Process simulation. 

Circuit and timing simulation. Design of standard cell and gate array based circuits and their simulation. Computer-aided testing of integrated circuits. 

;;E.H. Nicollian and J.R. Brews, MOS physics and technology, John Wiley, 1982. 
W.R. Runyan, Semiconductor measurements and instrumentation, McGraw Hill, 1975. 
S.M. Sze, VLSI technology, 2nd Ed., McGraw Hill, 1988.;;
EE 674;Semiconductor surfaces. The ideal and non-ideal MOS capacitor. C-V and G-V techniques for characterization. Oxide charges, defects and interface states, and their measurement. DLTS and transient capacitance measurements. Hot electron effects and oxide breakdown. Radiation effects in MOS structures. The MOS transistor. Pao-Sah and Brews models for the MOS transistor. 
Short channel and hot carrier effects. MOS transistor scalling. MOS reliability. MOS transistor modelling.
;;S.M. Sze, Physics of semiconductor devices (2nd Ed), Wiley Eastern, 1981. 
E.H. Nicollian and J.K. Brews, MOS physics and technology, John Wiley, 1982. 
D. Kahng, ed., Applied Solid State Science, supplement 2, Academic Press, 1981. 
Y.P. Tsividis, operation and modelling of the MOS transistor, McGraw Hill, 1987. 
N.G. Einspruch and G.S. Gildenblat, eds, Advanced MOS Device Physics (VLSI Electronics vol.18), Academic Press, 1989. ;;
EE 676;Review of Poisson"s, continuity and drift/diffusion equations. 
Finite difference formulation of these equations in 1D and 2D. Computation of steady state device characteristics of a p-n diode, MOS capacitor and MOSFET. Small signal steady state analysis. Transient analysis. Specific topics related to device simulation: Numerical and computational error. Computer memory and CPU time requirements. Efficient linear solvers. Case study: MINIMOS. Introduction to process simulation. Modelling and simulation of oxidation, diffusion. Case study: SUPREM. Prerequisite : 

Familiarity with operation of basic semiconductor devices. 

knowledge of one programming language. 

;;S. Selberherr, Analysis and simulation of semiconductor Devices, Springer Verlag, 1984. 
W.L. Engl ed., Process and Device Modeling, North Holland, 1986. ;;
EE 681;Incidence and network matrices, singular transformations, z-matrix for short circuit studies, optimal ordering, axis discarding technique and network reduction. Load flow studies for AC and AC/DC systems. Newton-Raphson technique, decoupled load flow. Second order N-R method. Sparsity of matrix, contingency studies, stochastic load flow, state estimation in power systems. 
;;O.I. Elgerd, Electric energy systems theory, McGraw Hill, 1971. 
G.W. Stagg and A.H. El-Abiad, Computer methods in power system analysis, McGraw Hill, 1968. 
G.L. Kusic, Computer aided power systems analysis, Prentice Hall, 1986. 
I.J.Nagrath and D.P. Kothari, Modern power system analysis, Tata McGraw Hill, 1980. 
A.J. Wood and B.F. Wollenberg, Power generation operation and control, John Wiley, 1984. 
;;
EE 682;Economic implications of planning of system growth and operation. Load forecasting energy and demand forecasting for short and long range. 
Generating system reliability, configuration studies, growth of networks, automated transmission system expansion planning. 

Economic scheduling of thermal generation, consideration of transmission loss. Hydro-thermal scheduling. Reactive power flow analysis, reactive power and voltage control. 

;;U.G. Knight, Power system engineering and mathematics, pergamon, 1972. 
R. K. Sulivan, Power system planning, McGraw Hill, 1977. 
L.K. Kirchmayer, Economic Operation of power systems, Wiley, 1968. ;;
EE 683;AC system problems related to reactive power and stability, dynamic instability of systems, voltage collapse, system resonance phenomena. 
Type of static excitation systems. Linearisation of the generator and development of the perturbation model, stabilizer design. 

Series and shunt compensation. Design, performance, and control of overall VAR compensation schemes. Modelling static VAR systems. 

Effect of series capacitors on long AC lines. Modelling series capacitors for stability analysis. 

Slow voltage dynamics for on-load tap-changers. The concept of static phase shifting and its effects. 

Contribution of HVDC to reactive power compensation and stability Para methods of stability analysis of power networks: eigen analysis and frequency domain methods. Inclusion of DC lines in such analysis. The overall co-ordination problem in FACTs. 

Exciter, HVDC, and SVC interaction. 

;;P.M. Anderson, and A.A. Fouad, Power system control and stability, Part 1, 1977. 
T.J.E. Miller, "Reactive Power Control in Electric Systems", John Wiley & Sons, 1982. 
J. Arrillaga, C.P. Arnold, and B.J. Harker, Computer modelling of electrical power systems, John Wiley and Sons, 1983. 
Papers from IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems. 
;;
EE 684;Physics of circuit breaker arcs. High - pressure and vacuum arcs. Cathode and anode phenomena.Ionization processes. 
Formation of negative ions. Recombination processes. Energy-loss mechanisms arc stabilization techniques. Transport properties. Post arc currents and arc time constants. Dynamic behaviour of electric arcs. Application of theories to observed phenomena. Plasma parameters-electron, ion and neutral particle density and temperature. Transport parameters. Electric and magnetic probes. Microwave diagnostic techniques. Interferometry, mass spectrometry, shock-wave technique. 

;;C.H. Flurscheim, ed., Power circuit breaker theory and design, Peregrinus Ltd., 1975. 
T.H. Lee, Physics and engineering of high power switching devices, Mc. Press, 1975. 
W. Lochte-Holtgreven, ed., plasma diagnostics, North-Holland Publishing Co., 1968 
R.L. Huddlestone and S.L. Leonard, Plasma diagnostic techniques, Academic Press, 1965. 
;;
EE 685;Elements of a protective system. Overcurrent protection, directional protection. Differential protection. Distance protection. Static devices for realising various characteristics. 
Generator transformer and busbar protection. Carrier current protection. Computer approach to power system protection. Off-line and on-line approach. 

;;A.R. Van and C. Warrington, Power system protection, Chapman and Hall, 1968. 
;;
MM 610;Design considerations at elevated temperatures. Reactivity of solids. Creep-rupture behaviour. Fatigue at elevated temperatures. Stability of materials in service environments. High temperature materials. Refractory metals and alloys. 
Superalloys, high temperature ceramics, cermets and ceramic coatings. Processing of high temperature materials. Modern melting and solidification techniques. Powder metallurgy techniques. Thermomechanical treatments. 

;;P.R.Sahm and M.O.Speidel, High Temperature Materials in Gas Turbines : Ed. Elsevier, 1974. 
W.D.Kingery, Introduction to Ceramics, John Wiley and Sons, 1960. 
F.F.Y.Wang, Ceramic Fabrication Processes, Academic Press, 1976. 
R.M.German, Powder Metallurgy Science, Metal Powder Industries Federation, Princeton, N.J., 1984. 
;;
EE 686;Need for HVDC, AC vs DC: Comparative advantages. Converters and their characteristics. Control of the converters (CC and CEA) 
Parallel and series operation of converters. Equivalence of a dc system in an ac system. TANA and NA Digital simulation, per unit systems. Faults and protective systems, etc. 

;;K.R. Padiyar, HVDC power transmisson systems, Wiley eastern Ltd. 1990. 
J. Arillaga, C.P. Arnold and B.J. Haskar, Computer modelling of electrical power systems, John Wiley,1983. 
Papers from IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, and IEEE Transactions on Power Systems. 
;;
EE 687;Switchgear installation and criteria for selection. Circuit breaker ratings, principles of a-c circuit breaking. RRRV and recovery voltage and their control. Current chopping. Switching of capacitive currents. Kilometric faults. Resistance switching. D-C circuit interruption. 
Principle of fusegear. Salient features and characteristics of different arc interrupting media - air, oil, air-blast, SF6 , and vacuum. 

The electric arc and circuit breaker. Establishing an arc, discharge characteristic of arc, long arc, short arc, energy transfer between electric field and the arc column, energy transfer out of the column. 

Theories of arc interruption - restriking voltage and energy - balance theories and their applications. 
;;C.H. Flurscheim Ed., Power circuit breaker theory and design, Peter Peregrinus Ltd., 1976. 
K. Regaller ed., Current interruption in high-voltage networks, Plenum Press, 1978. 
;;
MM 611;Fick s laws and the atomistic theory of diffusion. Impurity diffusion in pure metals. Diffusion in dilute and concentrated binary alloys. Grain boundary and surface diffusion. 
Determination of diffusion coefficients. Diffusion in ionic solids, non-stoichiometric compounds, semiconductors, optical materials, amorphous semiconductors, Thin films, Anomalous diffusion. 

;;P.G.Shewmon, Diffusion in Solids, McGraw-Hill, 1963. 
F.J.Kedves and D.L.Beke (Ed.), DIMETA-82 : Diffusion in Metals and Alloys, Trans Tech. Publications, 1983. 
J.S.Kirkaldy and D.J.Young, Diffusion in the Condensed State, The Institute of Metals, 1987. 
;;
EE 691;The aim of the course is to expose students to modern measurement techniques applicable to a large spectrum of measurement situations. An undergraduate level exposure to Electrical Engineering including representation of signals and systems and electronic instruments will be necessary. 

Representation of signals in the time and frequency domain. 

Applications of scopes, spectrum and signal analyzers. 

Measurement of transfer function of a linear system via sinusoidal, impulse and noise excitation. 

Noise in measurement. Improvement of signal to noise ratio by synchronous detection and signal averaging. 

;Equivalent of Signal;
A.V. Oppenheim, A.S. Willsky and I.T. Young, Signals and systems, Prentice-Hall, 1985. 
P. Eykhoff, System identification: parameter and state identification, Wiley, 1974. 
B.M. Oliver and J.M. Cage, eds., Electronic measurements and instrumentation, McGraw Hill, 1971. 
A.M. Rudkin, ed., Electronic test equipment, Granada, 1981. 
M.L. Meade, Lock-in amplifiers, Peter Peregrinus, 1983. 
Plus journal articles and application notes of instrument manufacturers. ;;
EE 695;This course will consist of seminars on current research topics in Electrical Engineering presented mainly by students under the guidance of a group of faculty. There will be three weekly meetings of one hour each. It is intended that more than one parallel seminar course run under the same title. The courses would be co-ordinated by a single faculty member. ;;;;
EE 696;This course will consist of seminars on current research topics in Electrical Engineering presented mainly by students under the guidance of a group of faculty. There will be three weekly meetings of one hour each. It is intended that more than one parallel seminar course run under the same title. The courses would be co-ordinated by a single faculty member. ;;;;
EE 697;This course will consist of lectures by a group of faculty on current research topics in Electrical Engineering. There will be three weekly meetings of one hour each. It is intended that more than one parallel special topics course run under the same title. The course would be co-ordinated by a single faculty member. ;;;;
EE 698; This course will consist of lectures by a group of faculty on current research topics in Electrical Engineering. There will be three weekly meetings of one hour each. It is intended that more than one parallel special topics course run under the same title. The course would be co-ordinated by a single faculty member. ;;;;
EE 702;Imaging model and geometry, scene radiance and image irradiance, reluctance model of a surface, Lambertian and specular reflectance, photometric stereo. Ill-posedness of vision problems, regularization theory. Shape from shading, structured light and texture. Optical flow, passive navigation and recursive motion analysis. Stereo vision and correspondence problem. MRF approach to early vision problems (shape from shading, matching, stereo and motion), Image texture analysis. Integrated vision, sensor fusion introduction to image understanding. ;;B.K. P. Horn: `Robot vision", MIT Press, 1986. 
D. Marr: `Vision", Freeman & Co., San Francisco, 1982. 
Selected papers. 
;;
EE 703;Examples of analog pulse and digital transmission systems. Roll of probability theory and stochastic processes. Review of probability theory and stochastic processes. Performance analysis of analog and pulse modulation systems. 
Principles of detection theory. Binary and m-ary hypothesis testing. Byes likelihood ratio test. Performance analysis of digital communication systems. 

Spectrum of digital signals. Spectral efficiency of digital communication systems. Nyquist pulse shaping. Correlative coding schemes. Equalization techniques. 

Synchronization techniques. Carrier, bit and frame synchronization schemes. 

;;Wozencraft J.M. and I.M.: `Principles of Communication Engineering", John Wiley, 1965. 
Carlson A.: `Communication Systems", 3rd ed., McGraw Hill, 1986. 
Van Trees H.L.: `Detection Estimation and Modulation Theory, Vol. 1., Wiley, 1968. 
Proakis J.J.: `Digital Communications, 2nd Ed., McGrow Hill, 1989. 
Blahut R.F.: `Digital transmission of Information", Addison Wesley 1990. 
Benedetto S., Biglieri E. and Castellari V.: `Digital Transmission Theory", Prentice Hall, 1987. 
;;
MM 615;Overview of welding processes, study of welding arc characteristics, metal transfer during arc welding, heat flow during welding, gas-metal and slag-metal reactions, weld-pool solidification, effect of welding process parameters on the macro- and micro-structure of weld metal. Thermal cycles in the heat affected zone. Phase transformations in the weld metal and the heat affected zone. Phenomena of hot-cracking and cold cracking. 
Residual stresses and distortion during and after welding. 

Applications of above principles to welding of carbon and alloy steels, cast irons, stainless steels, aluminium and titanium alloys. 

Fatigue and fracture of weldments. 

;;;;
EE 704;Biological memory mechanisms. Neural basis for human memory. 
Neuron models. The classification problem. Linear Classifiers. 

Training learning and generalization. Perception convergence theorem. Ho-Kashyap algorithm. 

Multilayer feed forward networks. Number of hidden nodes and VC-dimension. Kolmogorov"s theorem on representation of functions of several variables. The back propagation algorithms. Other algorithms. Applications. 

Hopfield network. Generalized convergence theorem. Computational power and capacity. Applications. Cellular neural networks. 

Stability. Convergence and computational power. Applications. 

Kohonen"s algorithm for self organizing networks. Convergence proof. Applications. Grossberg"s algorithm. Adaptive resonance theory (ART) for binary and analog input patterns. 

Simulated Annealing and Boltzmann machines. Principles of statistical neuro dynamics. 

Deductive theory of learning. Valiant"s model. Learnability and VC-dimension. 

;;Minsky M.L. and Papert S.: `Perceptrons", MIT Press, 1988. 
Gonzalez and Tou: `Pattern Recognition Principles`, Addison Wesley, 1974. 
Mc Clelland J.L. and Rumelhart O.E. ed.:`parallel distributed processing : Explorations in microstructure of cognition", MIT Press, 1986. 
Aarts E. and Korst J.:`Simulated Annealing and Boltzmann machines", John Wiley, 1989. 
Kohonen T.: `Self organization and Associative memory", Springer Verlag, 1984. 
;;
MM 616;Band theory of solids, structural, electrical, magnetic, dielectric and optical properties of materials; conductors, superconductors, high and low tension materials. 
Semiconducting compounds, amorphous semiconductors, dielectric materials, insulators. Special materials, ferroelectric materials, ferrites and laser materials; correlation between microstructure and material properties. 

;;N.B.Hannay and U.Colombo, (Eds.) Electronic Materials, Plenum Press, New York, 1973. 
Ed.J.B.Birks, Modern dielectric Materials, Heywood and Company, London, 1960. 
;;
EE 705; Lectures : Introduction to logic, timing and circuit simulation. Circuit design with FPGAS and PALS, issues in high speed circuit design. 
Experiments : Design of a complex digital circuit (eg. an ALU or a multiplier) using high level hardware description languages, logic simulation and timing simulation. 

Extraction of critical paths and circuit simulation of critical path sub-circuits. 

Circuit partitioning and realisation using FPGAS or PALS. Design of an analog circuit (eg. a filter) using circuit simulation. 

Setting up macromodels for subcircuits (eg. for OPAMS). Construction and performance verification for the circuit. 

Simulation of transmission line effects in a circuit layout. 

Project type experiments using a variety of techniques learnt in the course for realising circuit modules. 

;;SPICE 2G users, manual IRISIM timing simulator users" manual Principals of CMOS VLSI Design, N.Weste and K. Eshraghian (Addison Wesley, Second) 
;;
EP 213;Velocity of sound in solids, Mesurement of magnetic induction B by search coil, e/m for electorn by ma gnetoron method, viscosity by Stoke"s method, thermal conductivity by Forbe"s method, Rating of Vacuum pump, self and mutual inductance by ballistic galvanometer, stydy of electromagnetic indution, Variation of specific heat of graphite with temperature ,linear expansion by interference method.;;;;
MM 617;Gibbs free energy composition diagrams, Analysis and synthesis of phase diagrams. Solid-solid nucleation theory. Interface and diffusion controlled growth. Thermodynamics and Kinetics of phase separation. Order-disorder transformations. Crystallography of martensitic transformation. Transformations in rapidly solidified alloys and glasses. Phase stability in advanced ceramics. High pressure phase transformations. Phase Transforations in Steels. ;;H.I.Aaronson (Ed.), Lectures on the Theory of Phase Transformations, The Metallurgical Society (AIME), Warrendale, Pennsylvania ,1975. 
J.W.Christian, "Theory of Transformations in Metals and Alloys", Pergamon Press,1965. 
Peter Haasen (Ed.), Phase Transformations in Materials, VCH Publishers Inc, New York ,1991. 
T.J.Gray and V.D.Frechette, "Kinetics of Reactions in Ionic Crystals", Plenum Press, 1969. 
A.G.Khachaturyan, "Theory of Structural Transformations in Solids", Wiley Interscience Publishers, 1983. 
A.M.Alper, "Phase Diagrams : Material Science and Technology", Vol.6, Academic Press,1978. 
;;
EP 215; Testing of electronic components and solidering practice, design of printed circuit board, conversion of galvanometer to voltmeter and ammeter, output resistanceof a D.C.source, use of cathode ray oscillcope for measuring frequency, amplitude of different wave shape, etc., study of R.C. circuit with constant and variable E.M.F.,phase measurement in R.C.circuit with low frequency A.C.,study of L.R. and LCR circuits, Q factor of LCR circuit,Measurement of Capacitance by Schering Bridge. 
Design of multimeter,filtering and phase shifting networks, Regulations characteristics of rectifier to obtain ripple factor in different filters, semi-conductor diode characteristics, Bi-polar transisteor characteristics,Applications of diode (clipping and a.c.voltage multiplier), Response of indicating instruting-analogue meter, digital meter,CRO, etc., Logic gate circuits I: all six gates-truth table verification, Logic gate circuits II: R-S-Flip-flop, J-K Flip-flop,etc. 

;;;;
EP 204;Wave nature of light, reflection, refraction and polarization. Total reflection and evanescent wave, phase change on total reflection. Coherence, spatial and temporal coherence, spectral resolution of a finite wave train, elements of Fourier transform spectroscopy. Interference, multiple reflections from thin films. Diffraction theory, Fresnel and Fraunhofer diffraction, gratings. Interferometers-Michelson"s and Fabry Perot, Propagation of light through matter, dispersion, abosrption and scattering. Elements of Quantum Optics, Applications of lasers. ;;G. B. Fowles, Introduction to Modern Optics, Holt Rinehart and Winston, 1975. 
M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, McMillan, 1974. 
S.C. Lipson and H. Lipson , Optical Physics Cambridge Univ. Press,1969. 
J.M. Stone, Radiation and Optics, McGraw Hill Inc., 1963.;;
MM 618;Polarization, Interference, Diffraction. Energy bands, Classification of solids, Electrical conductivity, Types of Semiconductors and their properties. Light emission processes, Materials, Laser principles, Types of Lasers (mainly solid state). Light transmission, Modulation methods-switching, scanning, frequency conversion. Principles, Materials and Applications. Survey of display devices. Photo-detectors, devices and materials. Photodiodes and photoconductors; Solar Cells. Heterojunction lasers, Quantum-well lasers-wavelength and materials selection criteria. Principles of fibre transmission; Integrated Optics. ;;J.Wilson and J.F.B.Hawkes, Optoelectronics: An introduction, Prentice-Hall International,1983. 
F.A.Jenkins and H.E.White, Fundamentals of Optics, McGraw Hill, London, 1981. 
A.Yariv, Introduction to Optical Electronics, Holt, Reinhart and Winston, 1971. 
H.Kressel and J.K.Butler, Semiconducting lasers and Heterojunction LEDS, Academic Press,1977. 
;;
MM 619;Semiconductors-elemental and compound, band structure of semiconductors, holes and electrons, impurity semiconductors, carrier densities in equilibrium, photoconductivity. Hall effect. Lifetime, recombination of electrons and holes. Minority carrier life time. Diffusion of carriers, p-n and n-p-n junctions. PIN diodes, p-n junction photo voltaic cells, phototransistors, optical and infrared detectors, field effect transistors. Metal-semiconductor contacts and semiconductor surfaces, heterojunctions and devices. ;;M.S. Tyagi, Semiconductor materials and devices, Wiley, NY 1991. 
J.C.Phillips, Bonds & bands in semiconductor, Academic Press, NY 1973. 
S.M.Sze, Physics of semiconductor devices, John Wiley, NY 1981. 
;;
EP 212;Design and study of common emitter amplifier, design of two stage feedback amplifier, design of common collector amplifier and common source FET amplifier, use of IC 741: (a) Inverting and non-inverting amplifier (b) Integrator and differentiator, (c) Multivibrator , (d) Weinbridge ascillator, Regulated power supply using 3-pin regulators. ;;;;
EP 214;H-photoelectric effect, ultrasonic grating Frank-Hertz experiment, Millikan"s oil drop experiement, Elastic Constants by interference method (Cornu"s fringes), susceptibility by Guoy"s method, Air track-study of potential well, Faraday effect-verdet"s constant, Dielectric constant and dipole moment of molecules, particle size estimation by diffraction.;;;;
MM 620;Preparation of metallic, ceramic and composite powders. 
Mechanical, solid state and solution methods. Powder characterization : - Particle size, shape, distribution, surface area, structure, morphology and composition. 

Shape Forming : Uniaxial and isostatic compaction, extrusion, injection moulding, tape forming, slip casting and sol-gel casting etc. Powder coating on substrates. Flame and plasma spraying, electrophoresis, electrodeposition, sol-gel coating etc. 

Sintering : Solid state sintering, liquid phase sintering, reaction sintering, hot pressing, hot isostatic pressing and self propagating combustion sintering. 

;;W.D.Kingery, H.K.Bown and D.R.Uhlmann, Ceramic Science & Technology, John Wiley & Sons, 1976. 
F.F.Y.Wang, Ceramic Fabrication Processes, Academic Press, 1976. 
I. Jenkins and J. Wood, "Powder Metallurgy: An Overview" Institute of Metals, London, 1991. 
R.M.German, Powder Metallurgy Science, Metal Powder Industries Federation, Princeton, N.J., 1984. 
;;
EP 303;Thermal equilibrium, Zeroth law and concept of temperature. First law and its consequences. Reversible, irreversible and quasi-static processes. Second law and Entropy. Heat Engines, refrigerators and some engineering applications. 
Thermodynamic potentials. Equilibrium and stability conditions. Maxwell"s relations and applications. Gibbs phase rule. First and second order and lambda type phase transitions. Third law of thermodynamics. Thermodynamics of magnetism. Adiabatic demagnetization. Thermoelectric and thermomagnetic effects. 

Fundamentals of mass transfer of air-vapour mixtures. Modes of heat transfer and basic equations. General differential equation for conduction and steady state solution. Fins. Convection. Heat exchangers. Radiant heat transfer.

;;M.W.Zemansky, Heat and Thermodynamics, McGraw Hill, 1968. 
F.W. Sears and G.L. Salinger, Thermodynamics, Kinetic theory and Statistical Thermodynamics, Addison Wesley, 1977. 
D.ter Haar and H. Wergeland, Elements of Thermodynamics, Addison Wesley, 1966. 
J.R. Simonson, An Introduction to Engineering Heat Transfer, McGraw Hill, 1967. 
S.P. Sukhatme, A Text Book of Heat Transfer, Orient Longman, 1979. 
V. Gupta and J. Srinivasan, Heat and Mass Transfer, Tata McGraw Hill. 
;;
MM 621;Electronic structure of alloys. Microscopic theories of alloy phase equilibrium. Phenomenological computation of phase diagrams. Theory of ordering. Strengthening mechanisms in multiphase alloys. Composite strengthening. Designing of alloys for resistance against creep, stress-rupture, fatigue, fracture, aqueous and stress corrosion, hydrogen embrittlement, oxidation, hot corrosion etc. Novel microstructures through rapid solidification, mechanical alloying etc. Sialons and related ceramic alloys. Shape memory alloys. ;;J.K.Tien and G.S.Ansell, Alloys and Microstructural Design, Academic Press, New York, 1976. 
J.L.Walter, M.R.Jackson and C.T.Sims, Alloying, ASM International, Ohio, 1988. 
K. Natesan and D.J. Tillak (eds), Heat-Resistant Materials (Conf. Proceedings), ASM International, Ohio, 1991. 
;;
EP 307;Wave functions, superposition principle, wave packets. Schrodinger equation, probability and current densities. Expectation values and Ehrenfest"s theorem. General formalism. 
Linear vectors and operators in Hilbert space, observables, commuting operators, momentum representations and uncertainty principle. Unitary transformations, Schrodinger and Heisenberg representations, equa-tions of motion. 


Applications: 
One dimensional potential problems, linear harmonic oscillator, polynomial solutions, creation and annihilation operators. Central forces, angular momentum, spherical harmon-ics, spin, addition of angular momenta motion in a well, free and bound states in Coulomb potential. ;;E. Merzbacher , Quantum Mechanics, Wiley, 1970. 
P.M. Mathews and K. Venkatesan, A Text book of Quantum Mechanics, Tata McGraw Hill, 1976. 
E. Messiah , Quantum Mechanics, North Holland. 
L. Landau and E. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics, Pergamon, 1965. 
;;
EP 313;Energy gap of semicondutors,Hall effect,Resistivity of ferrites,Transition of ferroelectrics, Hysteris is of wire and rod, Photo conductivity -emission sectrum, -absorption spectrum of iodine Rotation spectrum of cynogen,AlO vibrational spectrum,Gaseous discharge, Densitometry. ;;;;
EP 315;Familiarisation of the 8085 kit and programming, data transfer through input/output ports, Analogue to digital conversion using DAC, digital clock, control and transfer of datausing interrupts,control of stepper motor and some electronic instruments demonstration experiments. ;;;;
MM 622;Scattering and diffraction of X-rays. Reciprocal lattice. 
Application of Ewald sphere construction to Laue and powder methods. Single crystal orientation from Laue patterns. Particle size estimation from line broadening. Texture determination in wires and sheets by photographic and diffractometer methods. Determination of crystal structure. Chemical analysis by X-ray diffraction. 

Structure of a transmission electron microscope. Geometry of electron diffraction. Indexing of single crystal electron diffraction patterns. Kikuchi patterns. Kinematical theory of diffraction contrast and its applications. Interpretation of images and dislocations, stacking fault and precipitates. 

Analysis of twinstructures, ordered structures and Moire patterns. Principles and analytical electron microscope operation. 

;;B.D.Cullity, Elements of X-ray Diffraction, Addison-Wesley, 1976. 
C.S.Barrett and T.B.Massalski, Structure of Metals, Pergamon Press, 1980. 
G.Thomas and M.T.Goringe, Transmission Electron Microscopy of Materials, John Wiley & Sons, 1979. 
M.V.Heimendahl, Electron Microscopy of Materials - An Introduction, Academic Press, 1980. 
;;
EP 304;Phase space. Microcanonical, canonical and grand canonical ensembles. Partition functions. Connection between statistical and thermodynamic quantities. Boltzmann statistics. Application to the ideal gaseous state and magnetic and electric phenomena. Bose-Einstein statistics. Application to blackbody radiation. Bose condensation. Fermi-Dirac statistics. Application to metals and semiconductors. Nuclear spin statistics,Ortho-and para hydrogen. 
Fluctuations and random walk phenomena. Time dependence of fluctuations, Noise.


;;C. Kittel, Thermal Physics, John Wiley, 1969. 
F. Reif, Statistical Physics, McGraw Hill, 1967. 
F. Mandl, Statistical Physics, John Wiley, 1971. 
N. Davidson, Statistical Mechanics, McGraw Hill, 1962. 
E.S.R. Gopal, Statistical Mechanics and Properties of Matter, MacMillan 1974. 
;;
MM 623;Rapid solidification (RS) techniques, Effects of RS on microstructure, rapid solidification processing of various microcrystalline alloys and intermetallic compounds. 
Consolidation of RS particulate materials and their use as reinforcements. 

Preparation of metallic glasses by RS techniques and attritor milling. Laser glazing. Composition and thermal stability of metallic glasses; Physical, mechanical and corrosion properties of metallic glasses and their applications. 

Network structure of various oxide glasses mechanical and physical properties of glasses. Fibre glass and optical fibres. 

Photosensitive glasses and glass-ceramics. Special glasses. 

;;T.R.Anantharaman (Ed.), "Metallic Glasses : Production, Properties and Applications", Trans. Tech. Publications, Switzerland, 1984. 
F.H.Froes and S.J.Savage (Eds.), "Processing of Structural Metals by Rapid Solidification", A.S.M. Pub., 1987. 
H.H. Liebermann (Ed), "Rapidly Solidified Alloys", Marcel Dekker Inc., N.Y, 1993. 
E. Arzt and L. Schulte (Eds), "New Materials by Mechanical Alloying Techniques", Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Metalkunde (DGM), Germany, 1989. 
D.R.Uhlmann and N.J.Kreidl (Eds.), "Glass : Science and Technology", Academic Press, 1984. 
J.Zarzycki, "Glasses and the Vitreous State", Cambridge Univ Press, 1991. 
S.J. Schneider Jr.,"Ceramics and Glasses" Engineered Materials Handbook, Vol.4, ASM Int. (1991) 
;;
EP 306;Mathematical Foundation : Tensors, components of second rank tensor, dyadics, transforma-tion of cartesian components under coordi-nates transformation, concept of a tensor field. Elasticity: Linear elasticity theory, shear, compressibility, bending of a beam, torsion of a rod, stress and strain tensors, energy of a deformed body. 
Elastic waves in solids, wave reflection at boundaries. Rayleigh and Love waves. 

Fluids : Euler"s and Lagrange"s pictures of fluid motion, equation of continuity, Bernoulli Theorem and its applications, circulation. Newtonian viscous fluid, Naviers Stokes equation, Poisseuille flow in planes and pipes, ideas on turbulence. 

Waves in fluids, gravity waves, surface waves, wave energy. 
;;L. Breklhovskikh and V. Gancharov Mechanics of continua and Wave Dynamics, Springer Verlag, 1985 
W.M. Lai , D. Rubin and E. Krempl Introduction to continuum Mechanics, Pergamon Press, 1978. 
;;
MM 624;Graphical representation of aqueous equilibria, leaching under atmospheric and elevated pressures, bacterial leaching, electrochemical processes in leaching, concentration and purification of leach solutions, metal recovery. Reaction kinetics, chemical engineering concepts, design of reactors. 
Electrowinning and electrorefining of metals from aqueous and fused salt systems. 

;;E.Jackson, Hydrometallurgical Extraction and Reclamation, Ellis Harwood Ltd., 1986. 
A.S.Foust and others, Principles of Unit Operations, John Wiley, New York, 1980. 
;;
EP 312;Fresnel"s laws of reflection,Raleigh interferometer, of liquids- Pulfrich"s refractometer, Michelson"s interferometer, Laser diffraction.Geiger Counter, Gama ray spectrometer, Alpha spectrometer,Statisitics of nuclear counting, x-ray emission, x-ray absorption spectrum, x-ray diffraction. ;;;;
EP 411;The students will be expected to undertsand the basic principle of working and also carry out analysis of samples in a few simple cases, with the following techniques. 
Atomic absorption and emission. X-ray diffraction and fluorescence. NMR, ESR, ESCA and Auger. Absorption in visible and infrared. Raman Scattering, Photo-acoustic detection Nitrogen and tunable dye lasers, Electron microscopy 

;;;;
EP 401;Optical Fibers - multimode, graded index and single mode fibers. Wave propagation in step index fibers, transcendental equation normalised frequency and cut-off, linearly polarised modes, power flow, dispersion and losses. Non-linear effects - SRS, SBS, SPM. Fiber devices. ;;A. Yariv, Optical Electronics, 4th Edn. Holt Rinehart and Winston, 1991. ;;
MM 625;Particle characterization, Design and analysis of mineral crushing and grinding circuits, Materials handling, Plant practice and flow sheets. Gravity concentration, Bartley Mozley, Multigravity separation, Dewatering methods. Physicochemical processer in flotation, column flotation and other advancements. Fine particle processing, flocculation/selective flocculation. Simulation and control of froth flotation circuits, Automatic control of mineral processing operations. ;;E.G.Kelley and D.Spotiswood, Introduction to Mineral Processing, John Wiley & Sons, 1982. 
A.J.Lynch, Mineral Crushing and Grinding Circuits, Elsevier, 1977. 
R.O.Burt, Gravity Concentration Technology, Elsevier, 1984. 
B.A.Wills, 4th Edition, Mineral Processing Technology, Pergamon Press, 1988. 
;;
EP 402;Integrated optics - hybrid and monolithic. Wave propagation in planar structures. Coupled wave analysis. Fabrication technologies for integrated optic devices. Passive devices - Splitters, combiners, multiplexers/demulti-plexers, couplers. 
Active devices - modulators, switches, frequency translators. 

;;A. Yariv, Optical Electronics, 4th Edn. Holt Rinehart and Winston, 1991.;;
MM 626;Corrosion-oxidation characteristics of metals, alloys and composite materials at elevated temperature. Wet corrosion. 
Pourbaix and Evans diagrams. Various forms of corrosion, including localized corrosion, their characterization and remedial measures.Corrosion fatigue. 

Corrosion Inhibitors. Corrosion protection and control methods. 

Instrumentation and experimental techniques. 

;;N.D.Tomashov, Theory of Corrosion and Protection of Metals, Macmillan, 1967. 
M.G.Fontana, Corrosion Engineering, III ed., McGraw-Hill, 1985. 
H.H.Uhlig, Corrosion & Corrosion Control, Wiley, 1985. 
;;
EP 404;Interaction of radiation with matter, Detection of radiation.Fission and Fusion as energy source, Reactor Physics - Different types of reactors, tracer techniques, activation analysis. 
Radiation induced effects and their applications: Ion beam and PIXE particle induced X-ray emission techniques, applications in semiconductor technology, material analysis, environmental studies and medicine. 

;;R. L. Murray, Nuclear Reactor Physics, Prentice Hall. 
R. Stephenson, Introduction to Nuclear Engineering, McGraw Hill. 
J. H. Fremin, Applications of Nuclear Physics, Oxford University Press. 
;;
PH 401;Review of Newton"s laws of motion. Frames of reference. Conservation laws. Central orbits. Scattering. Rotating coordinates and Corilis force. Rigid body dynamics. Moment of inertia tensor and Euler"s equations. 
Variational principle. Lagrange"s and Hamilton"s formulations. Poisson brackets. 

Periodic motion, small oscillations, normal coordinates. Basic concepts of H.J. theory and action angle variables. 

;;H. Goldstien, Classical Mechanics, Addison Wesley. 
K.R. Symon, Mechanics, Addison Wesley. 
L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, Mechanics, Pergamon Press. 
;;
MM 627;Theory of surface reconstructions, electronic properties of surfaces interfaces and overlayers. Characterisation surfaces by photons, electrons and ions as the probes. The effect of substrate surface structure on the overlayer properties. 
Theoretical and experimental evaluation of surface energies, solid-liquid and solid-gas interfaces-surface potentials, colloids, sedimentation, adsorption and reaction on surfaces. 

Damage of the surfaces by corrosion and wear. Wear mechanisms, and categories of wear. 

Surface modifications by diffusion, heat treatment and by coatings. Surface Processing by laser, electrons and ions. 

;;M.Prutton, Surface Physics, 2nd Edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1983. 
A.W.Adamson, Physical Chemistry of Surfaces, 3rd Edition, Wiley, 1976. 
K.G.Budinski, Surface Engineering for Wear Resistance, Prentice Hall, 1988. 
K.H.Zum Gahr, Microstructure and Wear of Materials, Elsevier, 1987. 
;;
MM 628;Principles of Soldification: Homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation. Growth of interface. Solidification of single phase metals and alloys. The structure of castings. Segregation. 
Gases in metals. Shrinkage in castings. Risering and Gating. 

Metallurgy and melting practice of cast irons, steels, nonferrous alloys such as that of aluminium, copper, magnesium, zinc, etc. with respect to development and control of cast structures. 

;;Solidification and Casting by G.J. Davies, Applied Science Publishers Ltd. 1973. 
Solidification and Cast Structure, I. Minkoff, John Wiley, 1986. 
Principles of metal casting, Heine, Loper and Rosenthal. TMH. 
Foundry Technology, P.R. RBeeley, Butterworths, 1972. 
ASM Metal handbook, Vol.15, 9th edition, 1988. 
Fundamentals of Foundry Technology, P.D. Webster, Portculillis Press, 1980. 
;;
PH 403;Historical background: Wave functions, Superposition principle, Wave packets. Schrodinger equation. Probability and current densities. Expectation values and Ehrenfest"s theorem. 
General formalism: Linear vectors and operators in Hillbert space, observables, commuting operators, momentum representation and uncertainty principle. Unitary transformations, Schrodinger and Heisenberg representations, Equations of motion. 

Applications: One dimensional potential problems, Linear harmonic oscillator polynomial solutions,creation and annihilation operators. Central forces, angular momentum, spherical harmonics, spin, addition of general angular momenta. Motion in a well. Free and bound states in a Coulomb potential. 

;;E. Merzbacher, Quantum Mechanics, Wiley 1970. 
P.M. Mathews and Venkatesan , A Text book of Quantum Mechanics, Tata McGraw Hill, 1976. 
A.Messiah, Quantum Mechanics, North Holland. 

L. Landau, and E. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics, Pergamon, 1956. 
;;
MM 629;Principles of Soldification: Homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation. Growth of interface. Solidification of single phase metals and alloys. The structure of castings. Segregation. 
Gases in metals. Shrinkage in castings. Risering and Gating. 

Metallurgy and melting practice of cast irons, steels, nonferrous alloys such as that of aluminium, copper, magnesium, zinc, etc. with respect to development and control of cast structures. 

;;Solidification and Casting by G.J. Davies, Applied Science Publishers Ltd. 1973. 
Solidification and Cast Structure, I. Minkoff, John Wiley, 1986. 
Principles of metal casting, Heine, Loper and Rosenthal. TMH. 
Foundry Technology, P.R. RBeeley, Butterworths, 1972. 
ASM Metal handbook, Vol.15, 9th edition, 1988. 
Fundamentals of Foundry Technology, P.D. Webster, Portculillis Press, 1980. 
;;
PH 404;Crystal structure, point and space grups. X-ray, electron and neutron diffraction. Bonding in solids. Ionic and covalent bonds, cohesive energy of metals, van der Waal"s solids. 
Mechanical properties, stress and strain, elastic moduli, point, line and volume defects. 

Thermal properties. Lattice vibrations, Einstein and Debye models, phonons, thermal conductivity, thermal expansion. 

Electrical polarizability. Dielectrics and ferroelectrics. 

Electron theory. Free-electron and NFE models, tight binding method. 

Energy bands in solids. Thermal and electrical conductivity. 

Thermo-electric effects. Hall effect and cyclotron resonance. 

Dia-,para-, and ferromagnetism, superconductivity. 

;;W. Harrison, Solid State Theory Tata McGraw Hill. 

N. Ashcroft and N.D. Mermin, Solid State Physics, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1972. 
J. Ziman, Principles in the Theory of Solids, Cambridge. ;;
PH 405;p-n,p-n-p junction semiconductor devices, Rectifier circuits, h-parameter models, Field effect transitors, Low-frequency amplifiers, operational amplifiers and related circuits, Regulated Power Supplies, Pulse and digital circuits. 
;;J. Millman, Micro electronics, Mc Graw Hill, Kogahusha, 1979. 
H. Taub and Schilling D., digital Integrated Electronics, Mc Graw Hill, Kogahusha, 1977.;;
PH 406;Error definition, error propogation, finite difference calculus, interpolation and extrapolation, roots of equations, solution of simultaneous linear algebraic equation, least square curve fitting, numerical integration, numerical solution of ordinary differential equations, matrix eigenvalue problem and monte carlo methods. ;;Steven C. Chapra & Raymond P Canale, Numerical Methods for Engineers, McGraw-New York, 1990 
C.E. Froberg, Introduction to Numerical Analysis, Addision Wesley Reading, Mass., 1965. 
T.R. McCalla, Introduction to Numerical Methods and Fortran Programming, John Wiley., N.Y. 1967. 
William Press et al Numerical Recipes in Fortran/C, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1992. 
;;
PH 407;Scalar and vector fields. Vector equations, Differentiations, gradient tangent plane, divergence and curl. Integrations, surface and volume integrals, Green, Gauss, and Stokes theorems and their applications. 
Transformations of coordinate systems and vector components, metric coefficients, curvilinear coordinates. Expressions for grad. div. and curl. Helmholtz eqn in three dimensions and separation of variables in various coordinate systems. 

Matrices and determinants. Linear equations of homogenous and inhomogenous types. Linear vector spaces. Scalar product. Linear independence. Change of basis. Schmidt orthogonalisation. Special matrices. Bilinear and quadratic forms. Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors. 

Transformation of matrices, diagonalization, orthogonal and unitary transformations. 

Functions of a complex variable, limit, continuity, analytic function, Cauchy formula, Laurent series, isolated and essential singularities. 

Contour integrations. Conformal transformations. 

Fourier series. Fourier and Laplace transforms with applications . 

;;M.R. Spiegel, Vector Analysis, Schaum"s outline series. 

H.A. Hinchey, Introduction to Applicable Mathematics, Part I, Wiley Eastern. 

P.Dennery and M. Krzywicki, Mathematics for Physicists, Harper & Row. 

R.V. Churchill, Complex variables and applications, McGraw Hill. 

J. Mathews and R.L. Walkar, Mathematical Methods of Physics, Benjamin. 

;;
PH 408;Functions of complex variables, zeros, poles and branch cuts. 
Applications of residue theorem. Analytic continuations. Dispersion relations. Asymptotic series. Method of steepest descent. Gamma, Beta and error functions and their asymptotic series. 

Ordinary differential equations, second order homogeneous and inhomogeneous equations, Wronskian, general solutions. Adjoint of a differential equation. Ordinary and singular points. Series solutions. Gauss hypergeometric and confluent hypergeometric equations. Sturm-Liouville problem. Legendre, Hermite and the associated polynomials, their differential equations, generating functions. Bessel functions, spherical Bessel functions; first and second kinds; differential equations. Integral representations of hypergeometric, confluent hypergeometric and other special functions. 
;;F.A. Hinchey, Introduction to applicable Mathematics, part I, Wiley Eastern. 

P. Dennery and A. Krzywicki, Mathematics for Physicists, Harper and Row. 

P. Morse and H. Feshbach, Methods of Theoretical Physics, Vol.1, McGraw Hill.;;
PH 411;Millikan"s oil drop expriment,h-photoelectic effect,Ultrasonic grating, Franck-Hertz experiment, Elastic constant by interference method (cornu"s fringes), Susceptibility by Guoy"s method, Airtrack-study of potential well, Faraday effect-Verdet"s constant, Rating of vacuum pump. ;;;;
PH 412;Energy gap of semiconductors, Hall effect, Registivity of ferrites, Transition of ferroelectrics, Hysterisis of wire and rod photo conductivity. - emission spectrum, absorption spectrum of iodine, Rotation spectrum of iodine, Rotation spectrum of cynogar, AlO vibrational spectrum, Gaseous discharge, Densitometry. ;;;;
PH 413;Exposure to DOS and Unix environment. Elementary numerical programming using either FORTRAN-77 or C Language. ;;B. Davis and T.R. Hoffmann, Fortran-77-A Structured Disciplined style, McGraw Hill, Singapore, 1988. 
;;
MM 630;Diffusion through porous solids. Mass Transfer in packed beds. 
Gas-solid reaction kinetics, reduction and oxidation processes and other applications. Liquid-liquid mass transfer, foams and emulsions, slag metal reactions. Mass transfer during electrochemical processes. Gas-liquid reaction, degassing, and other applications. Enhanced vaporisation combustion in flames and flame characteristics. 

;;I.Szekely and N.J.Themelis : "Rate Phenomena in Process Metallurgy", Wiley, N.Y., 1971. 
J.Szekely, J.W.Evans and S.Y.Sohn : "Gas-Solid Reactions", Academic Press, N.Y., 1976. 
O.Levenspiel : Chemical Reaction Engineering, Wiley Eastern, 2nd Edition, 1982. 
H.Y.Sohn and M.E.Wadsworth : Rate Process in Extractive Metallurgy, Plenum, 1979. 
;;
PH 414;Logic gate circuits: all six gates and truth table verification; R-S and J-K flips using NOR-NAND gates, Design and study of common emitter amplifier, two stage feeddback amplifier, common collector and FET apmlifier, Use if IC741: (a) Inverting amplifier (b) Integulator (c) Multivibrator (d) Weinbridge oscillator, Unregulated and regulated power supply: estimation of ripple factor for different filters. ;;;;
PH 422;Approximation methods in Quantum Mechanics. WKB method. Connection formulae. Bohr"s quantization condition. Penetration through a pontential barrier. Time independent perturbation theory. Zeeman and Stark effects, Convergence of the perturbation series. Time dependent perturbation theory. Transition, scattering probability. Absorption and emission of radiation, Einstein coefficients. Variational procedure. 
Applications to Helium atom and many particle systems. Theory of potential scattering. Cross section, method of partial waves. 

;;E. Merzbacher, Quantum Mechanics, Wiley, 1970 
P.M. Mathews and K. Venkatesan, A text book of Quantum Mechnanics, Tata McGraw Hill, 1976. 
A. Messiah, Quantum Mechanics, North Holland. 

L. Landau and E. Liftshitz, Quantum Mechanics, Pergamon 1965. 
;;
MM 631;Structure and properties of liquid metals. Thermodynamics of molten iron alloys. Structure of molten ionic and polymeric melts. Ionic theory of slags. Thermodynamic and kinetics of slag metal reactions. Reactions in dispersed systems. 
Homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation. Interaction of gas streams and jets with steel baths. 

Reactions of carbon phosphorus and sulphur. Gases in steel. 

Inclusion modification. Advances in Steelmaking and Casting. 

;;T.A. Engh, Principles of Metal Refining, Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 1992. 
C.Bodsworth and H.B.Bell : Phy. Chem. of Iron and Steel Manufacture, Longman, 1972. 
F.D.Richardson : "Phy. Chem. of Melts", Vol.1 and 2, Academic Press, 1976. 
E.T.Turkdogan : "Principles of Pyrometallurgy", Academic Press, 1980. 
;;
PH 424;Electrostatics. Multipole expansions. Fields in dielectric media. 
Magnetic properties of matter. Boundary value problems. 

Wave equation. Reflection, refraction and propagation of waves in dispersive media. Postulates of special relativity. Lorentz transformation. Relativistic Kinematics. 

;;J. Reitz and F.J. Milford, Foundations of Electromagnetic theory, Addison Wesley. 

C.A. Coulson, Electricity, Oliver and Boyd 
A.P. French, Special Relativity,Nelson, London. ;;
MM 632;Introduction to modelling steps in mathematical modelling and simulation; model equations. Types of models. Introduction to numerical methods with special emphasis on implementation. Some examples of models for materials processing operation. ;;D.M.Himmelblau and K.B.Bischoff; Process Analysis and Simulations: Deterministic Systems, John Wiley, NY, 1968. 
W.H.Press, et al; Numerical Recipes: "The Art of Scientific Computing", Cambridge Univ. Press, N.Y., 1988. 
J.Szekely, et al; The Mathematical and Physical Modelling of Primary Metals Processing Operations, John Wiley, N.Y., 1988. 
;;
PH 502;Symmetries in quantum mechanics. 
Conservation laws. Discrete symmetries. Relativistic quantum mechanics. Klein-Gordon equation and Dirac equation. Hole theory of of positron. Hydrogen atom. Two component Weyl equation. Introduction to the properties and interactions of particles. 

;;J.J. Sakurai, Advanced Quantum Mechanics Addison-Wesley. 

S.S. Schweber, An introduction to relativistic quantum field theory, Row-Peterson. 

J. Bjorken and S. Drell, Relativistic Quantum Mechanics, McGraw Hill. ;;
MM 633;Functions of complex variables, vector algebra, matrices and determinants, nonlinear algebraic and transcendental equations, partial differential equations, fundamentals of numerical methods, error analysis, computer oriented algorithms, collection and presentation of data. ;;R.M.Meyer, Essentials of Mathematics for Applied Fields, Springer Verlag, 1979. 
E.Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 5th Edition, Wiley, 1985. 
R.Hamming, Numerical Methods for Scientists and Engineers, 2nd Edn. McGraw Hill, 1973. 
;;
PH 503;Energy quantization, momentum of radiation, radiative transition probabilities, line-widths, laser interactions in hydrogen atom, Lamb shift, hydrogen maser. Coupling of angular momenta and multiplet structure in many electron atoms. Atomic magnetism, gyromagnetic effects, angular momentum of radiation and free electrons. Zeeman and Paschen Back effects. Hyperfine and Nuclear quadrupole interactions. 
X-ray and photoelectron spectra. Electronic, vibrational and rotational spectra of diatomic molecules. 

Experimental methods in atomic and molecular physics : interference, level-crossing, Fourier transform and radio frequency spectroscopy. 

Life times and oscillator strengths. Electronic and atomic collisions. 

Basic principles of NMR, NQR, ESR, Mossbauer, Microwave, I.R. and Raman spectroscopy. 

;;B. Cagnac and J.C. Pabey-Payroula,Modern Atomic Physics Vol.I and II McMillan, 1975. 
U. Fano and L. Fano, Physics of atoms and molecules; An introduction to structure of matter, U. of Chicago Press, 1972. 
A. Bousquet Dunod, Instrumental Spectroscopy, Paris, 1969. 
D. Bates and I. Estermann, Advances in Atomic and Molecular Physics, Academic Press, 1965. 
;;
PH 504;Nature of light, wave propagation in dielectric media, wave guides and optical fibers, interaction of light with matter, semiclassical theory of radiation, laser resonators and Gaussian beams, solid state lasers, molecular and atomic gas lasers, semiconductor lasers and free electron laser. 
Non-linear optical frequency conversion, phase conjugation and optical bistability, applications of lasers. 

;;O. Svalto , Principles of Laser Physics, Plenum, 1982. 
A.Yariv , Quantum Electronics, II Edition, 1975. 
M. Sargent , M.O. Scully and W.E. Laurh Laser Physics, McGraw Hill, 1974. 
Haken, H. : Light Vol. 1 and 2, North Holland, 1984. 
Shimoda, A. : Introduction to Laser Physics, Springer, 1984. 
Maitland, A. and M.H. Dunn Laser Physics, North Holland, 1969. ;;
PH 505;Static properties of nuclei, nuclear binding energies and forces. The two nucleon problem. Systematics of nuclei and levels. Nuclear models. Alpha, beta and gamma decay. Nuclear reactions including fission. Accelerators, detectors and nuclear experimental techniques. ;;H.A. Enge, Introduction to Nuclear Physics, Addison-Wesley. 

B.L. Cohen, Concepts of Nuclear Physics, McGraw Hill. 

E. Segre, Nuclei and Particles Benjamin Inc. ;;
MM 635;Structure and defects in iron oxides. Thermodynamics and kinetic considerations in the reduction of iron ores. The blast furnace process. Movement of solids and gas and their chemical interactions. Slag formation and metalloid reduction reactions. 
Effect of external constraints (fuel injection through tuyeres, high top pressure, burden preparation, pre-reduction etc.) on technology and economics of blast furnace. 

Alternative methods of iron production-their technology and present status, economics, future prospect, probability and design consideration. 

;;L.Von Bogdandy and H.T.Engell, Reduction of Iron Ores, Springer Verlag, 1972. 
;;
PH 506;Observed molecular spectra (Experimental details and special features in different spectral regions). Separation of nuclear and electronic motion. Rigid and non-rigid rotation of linear, symmetric and asymmetric top rotors. Harmonic and anharmonic vibrations, Group theory and its applications in molecular physics, vibrational-rotational interaction in simple cases. Special cases : inversion doubling, internal rotation, etc. 
Electronic states and transitions. Coupling of rotational and electronic motion in diatomic molecules. Molecular orbital and valence bond theories. Quantitative treatment of H2 + ion and H2 molecule and discussion of other diatomic molecules. Directed valency and molecular structure. Bond properties from MO treatment of polyatomic molecules including . n- electron systems. Ligand field spectra. Vibrational spectra of crystals. 

;;G. Herzberg, Molecular Spectroscopy and Molecular Structure, Vol. I,II and III Van Nostrand. 

H. Eyring, J. Wolter and G.E. Kimball, Quantum Chemistry, Wiley. 

C.A. Coulson, Valence 2nd Edition, Oxford. 

;;
PH 507;Introduction to probability. Binomial, Poisson and Gaussian distributions and their applications in statistical mechanics. 
Distribution functions and phase space. H-theorem, equilibrium conditions and applications. Gibbs phases. Space-distribution functions. Lionville equation, equili-brium and erogodicity. 

Various ensembles, equilibrium distribution functions, partition functions, connection between statistical and thermodynamic quantities. 

Boltzmann statistics. Application to ideal gases, magnetic and electric phenomena and chemical equilibrium. Phase transitions and introduction to density matrix. Bose-Einstein Statistics. Application to black-body radiation. Bose condensation. Fermi-Dirac statistics. 

Application to metals and semi-conductors. Nuclear spin statistics. Ortho and para hydrogen. 

Non-equilibrium statistical mechanics. Langevin and Fokker-Planck equation. Brownian motion. Introduction to autocorrelation functions. 

;;J.E. Meyer and M.G. Mayer, Statistical Mechanics, John Wiley. 

A. Isihara, Statistical Physics, Academic Press 
K. Huang, Statistical Mechanics, John Wiley. 

F. Reif, Statistical Physics, Mc Graw Hill. ;;
MM 637;Molecular theory of deformation kinetics. Rate theory of plastic deformation. Micromechanistic approach for deformation behaviour of single crystals and polycrystals. Low temperature deformation of metals and other crystalline solids. Dynamic strain ageing, creep, internal stress. Deformation of intermetallic compounds. 
Substructural evolution at large strains. Recovery, recrystallization and grain growth during high temperature deformation. Formation of cell boundaries, slip in a cell structure and composite model of time dependent flow. 

;;R.W. Cahn, P. Haasen and E.J. Kramer (eds), Materials Science and Technology, Vol.6, Plastic Deformation and Fracture of Materials, H. Mughrabi (vol. ed), VCH, 1993. 
G. Krauss (ed.), Deformation, Processing and Structure, ASM, 1984. 
S.Krausz and H.Eyring, Deformation Kinetics, John Wiley and Sons, 1975. 
T.N.Baker (Ed.), Yield, Flow and Fracture of Polycrystals, Applied Science Publishers Ltd., 1983. 
R.J.Arsenault (Ed.) Plastic Deformation of Materials : Treatise on Materials Science and Technology, Vol.6, Academic Press, 1975. 
;;
PH 508;Irreducible tensor analysis. Deuteron problem. Nucleon-nucleon scattering. Effective range theory. Scattering at medium and high energies. The nucleon-nucleon interaction. Nuclear shell model. 
Collective model and deformed nuclei. Electromagnetic transitions. 

Beta decay. Nuclear reaction theory. Optical model. Direct reactions. 

;;M. A. Preston and R.K. Bhaduri, Structure of the nucleus, Addison-Wesley. 

C.S. Wu and S.A. Moszkowski, Beta Decay Interscience, N.Y. 
D.F. Jackson, Nuclear Reactions, Methuen Co. ;;
PH 511;Fresnel"s laws of reflection, Jasmin"s and Raileign interferometer, Michelson"s inter-ferometer, Laser diffraction. 
Geiger counter, Gamma-ray spectrometer, Alpha spectrometer, statistics of nuclear counting, X-ray emission, X-ray absorption spectrum, X-ray differaction. 

;;;;
PH 522;Elementary theory of groups and their representation, application solid state physics. Electronic state in solids. Hartree and Hartree-Fock approximation. Free electron, exchange, pseudopotential theory. 
Cohesive energy of simple metals. Energy bands and their symmetries. 

Magnetism: Heisenberg exchange and magnetic ordering, magnetic resonance and relaxation. Superconductivity: Microscopic theory, Josephson effect, flux quantization. 

;;W. Harrison, Solid State Theory Tata McGraw Hill. 

N. Ashcroft and N.D. Mermin, Solid State Physics, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1972. 
J. Ziman, Principles in the Theory of Solids, Cambridge. 

;;
MM 639; Magnetism in insulators, superexchange, magnetic ordering, anisotropy and magneto-striction.Structure and dynamics of domain walls. Techniques for preparation of polycrystalline and single crystal ferrimagnetics.Low frequency applications of ferrites and garnets: radio and TV components, chokes and transformers, recording heads. High frequency applications, circulators and isolators, phase shifters, mm wave nonreciprocal and reciprocal ferrite devices. Bubble magnetic materials, ion implantation for memory devices, applications. 
;;B.Lax and K.J.Button, Microwave Ferrites & Ferrimagnetics, McGraw Hill, NY, 1962. 
J.Helszajn, Principles of Microwave Ferrite Engineering, Wiley-Interscience, 1969. 
G.Winkler, Magnetic Garnets, Vieweg & Son, 1981. 
;;
PH 524;X-ray emission spectra-spin and screening doublet laws, multipole radiation and transition probabilities. Absorption spectra, theories of fine structure and extended fine structure, plasma oscillation theories. Soft X-ray emission and absorption spectroscopy and its application to band structure of solids, semiconductors and alloys. 
Effect of chemical combination on emission and absorption spectra. 

Nondiagram lines and atomic fluorescence yields (Auger effect). Advanced geometrical crystallography. Theory of diffraction by space-lattices. Intensity of reflection of X-rays by crystals. Atomic scattering factor anomalous scattering and the dispersion of X-rays. 

Influence of temperature on the diffraction of X-rays by crystals. 

Fourier synthesis general theory forms of Fourier synthesis useful in crystal structure analysis, symmetry in reciprocal space-application of symmetry to Fourier summations-sampling of the Fourier transform, phase determination for structures having a set of heavy or replacable atoms. Direct methods for phase determination. Methods of refinement. Calculation of interatomic distances, bond angles and standard deviation. 

;;A.H. Compton and S.K. Allison, X-ray in the theory and experiment D. Van Nostrand Co. 

Lawrence Bragg, Ed. Crystalline State, Volumes II and III, G. Bell and Sons Ltd. London. 

M. J. Buerger, Elementary Crystallography, John Wiley. 

M.J. Buerger, Crystal Structure Analysis, John Wiley. ;;
PH 525;Transmission lines. Waves guides. Impedance of transmission lines, VSWR, Smith Chart. Diffraction and scattering of electromagnetic waves. Wave equation with sources. Antennas and arrays. 
Motion of charged particles in an electromagnetic field. 

Microwave waveguide components. Microwave measurements.
;;E.K. Jordan and K.G. Balmain, Electromagnetic Waves and Radiation Systems, Prentice Hall India, 1971 
;;
PH 528;Theory of partial coherence; the auto-correlation function, interference spectroscopy, the Michelson Steller Interferometer, Intensity Interferometer. 
Diffraction theory of image formation;Fresnel and Frauhofer Diffraction, Fourler transforming and Imaging properties of lenses. 

Frequency analysis of optical imaging systems;spatial filtering; optical data processing. 

Holography; holographic interferometry, application of holography Speckle;speckle photography;speckle interferometry and applications of speckle
;;J.W. Goodman, An Introduction of Fourie Optics McGraw Hill, N.Y., 1968 
M.Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics Pergamon, N.Y., 1975 
W.T. Cathey, Optical information processing and holography, Wiley interscience, N.Y., 1974. 
S.H. Lee, Optical information processing fundamentals Springer, N.Y., 1974 
S.R.J. Collier, C.D. Burkhardt and L.H. Lin, Optical Holography, Academic Press, 1971. 
A.R. Shulman, Optical Data Processing, John Wiley, 1970 
;;
MM 641;Review of basic numerical methods like root finding, numerical integration, solving systems of equations, multiple linear regression etc. with special emphasis on computer implementation and applications in material processing. Initial and boundary value problems, partial differential equations. Introduction to finite difference (FDM) and finite element (FEM) methods. 
Applications in materials processing : heat transfer and solidification; metal forming processes : analysis of sheet necking, formability tests, forming limit diagrams (FLD) etc. 

;;Steven C.Chapra and Raymond P., Numerical Methods for Engineers: With personal computer applications, McGraw-Hill (International Edition), 1984. 
S.Kobayashi, Y.T.Im and T.Altan, Metal forming and finite element method, Oxford Univ. Press, New York, 1989. 
C.R.Boer, N.Rebelo, H.Rydstad and G.Schroder, Process Modelling of Metal Forming and Thermomechanical Treatment, Springer-Verlag, 1986. 
;;
MM 643;Solid solutions, Phase diagram and heat treatment, Diffusion, Imperfections in materials, Quantitative metallography, Deformation behaviour, Mechanical working, Thermo-mechancial treatment, Recovery and recrystallization, Fatigue and fracture, Experiments related to these topics.;;R.W.Cahn and P.Hassen, Physical Metallurgy, North-Holland Physics Publishers (1983). 
T.H.Courtney, Mechanical Behaviour of Materials, McGraw-Hill Publishing Co. (1990). 
Z.D.Jastrzelaski, The Nature and Properties of Engineering Materials, John Wiley and Sons (1987). 
;;
PH 540;Phenomenology of strong and weak interactions. Conserved quantum numbers. Leptons, nucleons and mesons. Partial conservation of axial current. Non-abelian gauge theories.Spontaneous breaking of global and local symmetries. The Higgs mechanism. Weinberg Salam Theory. 
Quantum Chromodynamics.Accelerator experiments and detectors. Low energy and non-accelerator experiments. Questions beyond the Standard model. Unification proposals. 

;;F. Halzen and A.D. Martin, Quarks and Leptons, John Wiley, 1984 
G. Kane, Modern Elementary Particle Physics, Addison Wesley, 1987 
K. Huang, Quarks, Leptons and Gauge Fields, World Scientific, 
;;
PH 801;Solutions of Laplace"s and Poisson"s equations, boundary value problems. Multipole expansion of the static field. Transformation properties of Maxwell"s equations. Conservation laws, action principle and equations of electrodynamics. Motion of charged particles in electromagnetic fields. Solutions of homogeneous and inhomogeneous wave equations. Radiations radiative processes and dispersion theory. Expansion of the electromagnetic field. Applications of the basic ideas of quantum systems. ;;Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, Wiley Panofsky and Philips, Classical Electricity and Magnetism, Addison Wesley. Rosenfeld, Electron Theory, North Holland. Landua and Lifshitz, Classical Theory of fields, Pergamon Press, 1956. 
;;
PH 802;Review of quantum Solid State theory, Single-partcle states, Bloch and Wannier functions, second quantization, Hartree-Fock theory of metals, single particle and collective excitation. 
Lattice dynamics in three dimensions, neutron diffraction, phonon-phonon interaction, electron-phonon interaction. 

Dielectric formulation of electron-gas problem, Magnetism: Magnetic ordering. Langevin and Curie susceptibility, spin Hamiltonian, Heisenberg, and lsing models, ferromagnetic ground-state, spin waves and their interactions, antiferromagnetism, critical indices, RKKY and super exchange mechanism, metallic magnetism. 

Superconducitivity; Phenomenology, Cooper pairs, BCS ground and excied states. Type II superconductors, Gorkov equations, Ginzbury-Landau theory, quantum phase and tunneling, high temperature superconductivity, Peierl"s instability and paraconductivity. 

;;D. Pines, Elementary Excitation in Solids, W.A. Benjamin, 1963. 
C.Kittel, Quantum Theory of Solids, John Wiley, 1963. 
Fetter and Walecka, Quantum Theory of many particle systems McGraw Hill, 1971. 
D.C. Mattis, Theory of Magnetism, Harper & Row, 1974. 
R. White, Quantum Theory of Magnetism. 
J.R. Schrieffer, Superconductivity W.A. Benjamin, 1964.;;
PH 803;Basic ideas of group theory, Group theory and quantum mechanics. 
Finite crystalo-graphic point groups and their representations. 

Electronic and vibrational states of molecules and crystalline solids. Full rotational group, Lorentz group and internal symmetries. 

Crystal field theory. Spin-orbit coupling, double groups. 

;;M. Tinkham, Group Theory and Quantum Mechanics: McGraw Hill Book Co., New York, 1964. 
V. Heine, Group theory in Quantum Mechanics: Pergamon Press, Oxford 1960. 
E.P. Wigner, Group Theory and its Applications to Quantum Mechanics: Academic Press, New York 1959. 
;;
PH 804;Long range and short range nuclear forces. Independent particle model. Collective model. Effective inter-actions in nuclei. 
Nuclear matter. Detection of nuclear radiations beta,alpha and gamma decay. Nuclear spectroscopy, Angular correlations. 

Nuclear interactions and elementary ideas of S-matrix theory. 

Compund nucleus and direct reaction approaches. polarisations. 

Fine, intermediate and gross structures of excitation functions. 

Applications of nuclear techniques. 

;;M.A. Preston, Physics of the nucleus. 

B.L. Colien, concepts in Nuclear Physics 
;;
PH 805;Review of standard methods in Quantum Mechanics including time independent perturbation theory. Selected topics from each of the parts (a), (b) and (c). a) Two electron atoms. Fermi Thomas, Hartree and Hartree Fock Equations, Configurations and spin orbit splitting. Born-Oppenheimer method for hydrogen molecule ions and hydrogenmolecule. Hydrogen atom in Dirac theory. 
b) Addition of angular momenta. Tensor Operators and Wigner Eckert theorem. Inter-action of radiation with matter. Ideas of quatised radiation fields. Multipole transitions. Photon scattering including Raman effect. 

c) Partial wave and Jost function methods in scattering. Levinson"s theorem. Varia-tional methods. Integral expressions for scattering amplitude. Born, Bethe and Oppenheimer approximations. Applications to electron-atom, ion-atom and nuclear collisions. 

;;J.C. Slater, Quantum Theory of Atomic structure. 

G. Baym, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics 
S. Geltman, Topics in Atomic Collision Theory 
;;
MM 645;Material and thermal balances, solutions, activity interaction parameters. Fluid statics, Bernoulli s equation, conductive and convective heat and mass transfer. Physical separation of materials, Flotation, movement of solids in fluids, ion-exchange and solvent extraction. Extractive metallurgy of copper and aluminium. Principles and processes in iron ore reduction and steelmaking. ;;H.S.Ray, R.Sridhar and K.P.Abraham, Extraction of non-ferrous metals, Affiliated East West Press, 1985. 
C.Bodsworth and H.B.Bell, Physical Chemistry of Iron and Steelmaking, Elsevier, 1972. 
H.S.Ray and A.Ghosh, Principles of Extractive Metallurgy, Wiley Eastern, 1991. 
;;
PH 806;Phenomenology of weak, electromagnetic and strong interactions. 
Quantization of fields. Quantum electro-dynamics. Renomalization to one loop. Lamb shift and anomalous magnetic moment. 

Gauge field theories and spontaneous breaking of symmetrics. The standard model of weak, electromagnetic and strong interactions Renomalization. 

;;"Particle Physics and Introduction to Field Theory", Y.D. Lee, Harwood Academic Publishers, 1981. 
"Quarks, Leptons and Gauge Fields" K.Huang, World Scientific, 1982. 
"Relativisitc Quantum Mechanics" J.D. Bjorken and S.D. Drell, McGraw-Hill, 1964. 
"Quantum Field Theory" L.H. Ryder Cambridge University Press, 1988. ;;
MM 651;Quantitative metallography, heat treatment and evaluation of mechanical properties, X-ray diffraction technique, DSC, surface energy measurement, induction melting and electroslag remelting, atomic absorption spectrometry, determination of magnetic properties, formability tests, evaluation of casting properties and moulding sand properties. ;;K. Tien and J.F. Elliott (eds), Metallurgical Treatises, Metall. Soc. AIME, 1981. 
G.E. Dieter, Mechanical Metallurgy, McGraw-Hill Book Co. (Third edition), 1988. 
G.A. Higgerson, Experiments in Materials Technology, Affiliated East-West Press, 1973. 
B. Chalmers and A.G. Quarrell (eds), The Physical Examination of 
;;
PH 807;This course will consist of lectures by a group of faculty on topics of current research interest in Physics. These will be three or four modules covering various areas of interest to the faculty of Physics. ;;;;
PH 808;Current Trends in Physics II same as PH-807 but covering different topics of interest. ;;;;
PH 811;Selected topics from the following: a) Vacuum Techniques: Production and measurement of vacuum, different types of vacuum systems and gauges, their working and limitations, leak detection, techniques for production of ultra-high vacuum. The laboratory work will consist of experiments with a vacuum system and assembling of a vacuum system. 
b) Electronics: Measurement techniques in electronics, use of different measuring devices, their scope and limitations. Power supplies, amplifiers, pulse techniques and high frequency techniques. 

Laboratory work will involve handling of different types of electronic measuring instruments. Study of certain readymade units. Design, fabrication and testing of some circuits. 

c) Detectors; Study of different types of detectors. Photographic detectors, micro-wave detectors, optical detectors, X-ray detectors, nuclear radiation detectors. The laboratory work will include experiments which make use of different types of detectors. 

d) Work Experience; Design and fabrication of simple pieces of equipment required in a physics laboratory. The students are expected to acquire familiarity with the use of common machine tools like lathes, milling machines, drilling machines, etc. 

;;;;
PH 820;Application of mathematical Techniques in Physics problems in classical mechanics, electrodynamics, and quantum mechanics, based on the following topics: Vector equations; equation of motion of particles in fields. 
Matrices and eigenvalue problems. 

Differential equations. 

Boundary value problems. 

Spherical harmonics, addition theorem and multipole expansions Fourier tranforms,delta -functions, Green"s functions. Method of residues, poles and cuts in complex variables. 

;;G. Arfken,Mathematcial Methods of Physics Academic Press, 3rd Edn., 1985. 
M.L. Boas: Mathematical Methods in Physical Sciences, John Wiley, 1983 2nd Edn. 
Churchill, R.V., J.W. Brown and R.F. Verhey:Complex variables and applications (Mc Graw Hill) N.Y. 5th edn., 1990. 
Jackson J.D. Classical Electrodynamics (Wiley N.Y., 2nd Edn., 1975. Merzbacher E. Quantum Mechanics Wiley) 
P. Morse and H. Fesbhabch: Methods of Theoretical Physics, Vol. I II (McGraw Hill ) , 1953. 
Spiegel, M.R. : Schaum"s outline of theory and problems of vector analysis and an introduction to Tensor analysis, Schaum, N.Y., 1959. 
Stakgold I, Green Functions & Boundary Value Problems, Wiley., N.Y. 
;;
CH 101;The wave equation, particle in a box; quantum numbers; electron energy levels in atoms; chemical bonding - ionic and covalent bonds; molecular orbitals r and n bonds; intermolecular forces; types of solids; crystals structure; close packed structure; point defects; metalic bonding; electrical and magnetic properties of solids. Physical and chemical equilibria; free energy and entropy; equilibrium constant; Nernst equation; colligative properties; rate of chemical reactions; collision theor y; catalysis. ;;B.H. Mahan, University Chemistry India Book Co. 1988 
S.H. Maron and C F. Prutton, Principles of Physical Chemistry, The MacMillan Co.,New York, 1969. ;;
CH 115;Experiments illustrating the concepts of 1) galvanic cells, (2) thermochemistry, (3) chemical kinetics, (4) equilibrium constant, (5) analysis by oxidation reduction titration. ;;;;
CH 102;Principles involved in the general methods of extraction of metals from their ores. Oxidation state, spectral and magnetic properties and important applications of transition and innertransition elements and their compounds. Hydrides of boron silicons. Important applications of non-transition elements and their compounds. Structural features of organic compounds and correlation with their properties and applications. In this context, the chemistry of petroleum and petrochemicals. Chemicals from coal, industrial solvents, oils, fats and waxes, detergents, natural and synthetic polymers, will be briefly discussed. ;CH 101;M.J. Sienko and R.A. Plane Chemical Principles and Applications, McGraw Hill, 1980 
L.O. Smith, Jr. and S.J. Cristol, Organic Chemistry, Affiliated East-West Press Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 1981. 
R.T. Morrison and R.N. Boyd, Organic Chemistry, 3rd Ed., Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi. 1978 (5th edition (1990). 
;;
CH 116;Experiments pertaining to (1) volumetric analysis by complexometry, (2) analysis by ion exchange resins, (3) analysis of a drug, (4) organic/inorganic synthesis, (5) instrumental methods of analysis.;;;;
CH 201;Schrodinger equation, hydrogen atom, atomic orbitals, electronic structure of atoms. Periodic properties. Variation method, LCAO approximation, hydrogen molecule ion, hydrogen molecule. Homonuclear and heteronuclear diatomic molecules. Polar bonds and electronegativity. Valence bond method, poly-atomic molecules, molecular shapes. Hybridization. Resonance. Spectra of molecules. 
;;Roy McWeeny, Coulson"s Valence, 3rd Edition, Oxford Univ. Press, 1979. 
P.W.Atkins, Physical Chemistry, 4th Ed., ELBS/Oxford, 1991. 
C.A. Coulson, Shape and Structures of Molecules, Oxford Univ. Press, 1973. 
;;
CH 215;Potentiometry, Single electrode potential, activity coefficient, titration/s, solubility product. 
Condutometry, titration/s, dissociation of weak acid as a function of concentration. 

Ionization constant by spectrophotometry, enzyme kinetics, use of immobilized enzyme electrode, adsorption isothem, M.O. methods in chemistry .

;;;;
CH 204;Systematic study of structure, properties and chemistry of hydrocarbons with emphasis on theoretical, stereochemical and mechanistic concepts. ;;K. Conrow and R.N. McDonald, Deductive Organic Chemistry, Addison Wesley, 1966. 
;;
CH 205;Basic concepts of quantitative analysis, Methods of sampling, errors in chemical analysis of data, general theory of neutralisation, redox, precipitation and complexometric titrations, acid-base titrations in nonaqueous solvents, linear titration methods. 
Solubility product and precipitation, precipitation from homogenous solution, organic precipitants and extractants. A brief survey of separation methods. Systematic qualitative analysis. 

;;J.G. Dick, Analytical Chemistry, McGraw Hill and Co. 1973. 
H.A. Latinan and W.E. Harris, Chemical Analysis, 2nd Edition, McGraw Hill and Co.,1975. 
R.A. Day and Underwood, Quantitative Analysis, 3d Edition, Prentice Hall of India, 1977. 
H.F. Walton, principles and Methods of Chemical Analysis, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall, 1966. 
;;
MM 111;Introduction to wood working, kinds of woods, hand tools and machines, pattern making,types of patterns, contraction allowance, draft and machining allowances. Principles of moulding methods, cores and core boxes. Introduction to fitting shop tools, equipment and operations. Sheet metal practice. Exercises: Simple exercises in patternmaking, moulding, fitting and sheet metal work. ;;S.K. Hajrachoudhury, Elements of Workshop Technology, Vol.I Asia Publishing House, 1986. ;;
CH 208;Brief review of chemical bonding and shapes of molecules using VSEPR theory. Acids bases, electrode potential and non-aqueous solvents. 
Nuclear structure and radio activity. Brief discussion of periodic tables and periodicity in properties. 

General methods of isolation and purification of elements. Chemistry of hydrogen, elements of Groups I and II. Introductory survey of transition elements with reference to electronic configuration, oxidation states, complex compounds, spectral and magnetic properties. Introduction to theories of metal-ligand bonding and stereochemistry. Chemistry of Scandium, Yttrium, Lanthanides and Actinides. 

;;F.A. Cotton and G. Willkinson, Basic Inorganic Chemistry, Wiley Eastern, 1978. 
M.J. Sienko and R.A. Plane, Chemical Principles and properties, McGraw Hill, 1975. 
J.D. Lee, Concise Inorganic Chemistry, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1977. 
M.C. Day and J. Selbin, Theoretical Inorganic Chemistry. Reinhold, 1978. ;;
CH 213;Inorganic Semi-micro qualitative analysis elements. Volumetric analysis involving simple redox, precipitation and complexometric titrations. Applications to analysis of alloys and minerals. ;;;;
CH 303;Chemistry of heterofunctional Organic compounds. 

Systematic Study of structure, properties and chemistry of heterofunctional organic compounds with emphasis on theoretical, stereochemical and mechanistic concepts. 
;CH 204;R. T. Morrison and R.N. Boyd, organic Chemistry, 4th Ed. Allyn Bacon, 1983. 
Kenneth Conrow and R.N. McDonald, Deductive Organic Chemis, Addison - Wesley, 1966. 

;;
MM 112;Introduction to safety measures, introduction to the principles of working, construction, operation, types of cutting tools, selection of cutting speeds and feeds etc. regarding basic machine tools e.g. lathe, shaping, slotting, milling and grinding machines, etc. Introduction to gas and arc welding processes, soldering and brazing. 
Exercise; Simple jobs on centre lathe and shaping machcines and welding. 

Demonstrations; Slotting, milling and grinding machines. 

;;S.K. Hajrachoudhury, Elements of Workshop Technology, Vol. II Asia Publishing House, 1986. 
;;
CH 307;Real gases, critical phenomenon, intermolecular forces, potential energy functions, liquid state, equations of state. Chemical thermodynamics, thermodynamics of solutions, nonideal solutions, solutions of macromolecules including colloidal solutions, phase rule, phase equilibria. Chemical equilibria.;;G.N.Lewis and Randall Thermodynamics, (Revised by K.S.Pitzer and L.Brewer), International Students Edition, McGraw Hill, 1961. 
P.W. Atkins, Physical Chemistry, ELBS OUP 2nd Edition, 1991. 
G.W. Castellan, Physical Chemistry, 3rd Ed. Addison - Wesley/Narosa Publishing House, 1993. ;;
CH 321;Chemistry of titanium, vanadium, chromium, manganese sub-group elements, iron, cobalt, nickel, platinum metals, copper and zinc sub- group elements, group III, IV, V, VI, VII and rare gases with reference to isolation, properties, uses and important compounds.;;F.A. Cotton and G. Wilkinson, Basic Inorganic Chemistry, Wiley Easter, 1978. 
M.J. Sienko and R.A. Plane, Chemical Principles and Properties, McGraw Hill, 1975. 
J.D. Lee, Concise Inorganic Chemistry, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1977. 
;;
MM 115;Geometry of consturction of simple plane figures. Free hand sketching. Drawing scales. Graphical communication through multiple projections, missing views. Simple projection of points, lines and planes. Orthographic projection of simple solids in simple positions. 
Sections of solids-I.S.I. Conventions. 

;;N.D. Bhatt, Elementary Engineering Drawing Charotar Publishers, Anand, 1979. 
;;
CH 308;Origin of life evolution. Introduction to Biomolecules, Biocatalysts, Thermodynamics of metabolic pathways. REproduction, genetic principles. Modern trends in biology and its applications in technology. ;;Stanley I. Miller and Leslie E. Orgel. The Origin of Life on the Earth, Prentice Hall, Inc., 1974. 
Melvin Calvin, Chemical Evolution, Oxford, 1969. 
E.E. Cohn and P.K. Stumff, Biochemistry, Wiley Eastern, 1976. 
Albert I. Lehninger, Short Course in Biochemistry, Worth Publishers, Inc.,1973. 
;;
CH 316;Complex material analyses minerals, alloys. Quantitative estimations using conductometry and spectrophotometry. Estimation of iron in iron ore. Estimation of mixture of metal ions by EDTA titrations. 
Karl-Fischer Titration. 

;;;;
CH 318;Qualitative analysis of organic compounds. Chemical separation of binary mixtures and their qualitative analysis. ;;R.L. Shriner, R.C. Fuson and D.Y. Curtin, Systematic Identification of Organic Compounds, a lab. manual, 6th ed. Wiley, New York. 
;;
MM 116;Sectional views: Full half, offset applied to simple assemblies. 
Screw threads, fasters and other standard machine elements. 

Symbols for welded joints, process flow, electrical and instrumental units. etc. Exposure to tolerances, surface finish, fits etc. 

Assembly and part drawings of simple assemblies and subassemblies of machines viz. couplings,clutches, gear assemblies, tool posts, I.C. engine components, etc. 

;;N.D. Bhatt, Machine Drawing, Charotar Book Stall, Anand, 1967. 
N. Sidheshwar, P. Kanniah and V.V.S. Sastry, Machine Drawing, Tata McGraw Hill, 1983. IS 696, 1972. 
;;
CH 326;Electrochemistry of solutions : Ion-solvent interactions, ion-ion interactions, macromolecule ion interactions, ionic migration and diffusion. 
Thermodynamics of galvanic cells : Equilibrium electrode potentials, IUPAC conversion for electrode potentials, classification of electrodes. Origin of emf and classification of electrochemical cells. Redox equilibria in bioenergetics and metabolism. 

Pourbaix diagrams and their application in corrosion. 

;;L.I. Antrapov, Theoretical Electrochemistry, Mir Publishers, 1972. 
J.O.M. Bockris and A.K.N. Reddy, Modern Electrochemistry, Vo. 1, Plenum Press, 1970. 
W.B. Wood, J.H. Wilson, R.M. Benbow, L.E. Wood, Biochemistry : A Problems Approach, 2nd Ed., Benjamin/Cummings, 1981. 
;;
CH 338;Phase equilibria, viscosity and molecular weight of polymers, surface tension, reaction kinetics (rates, order of reaction, influence of ionic strength), use of thermocouples, transition temperature determinations, self generated experiment.;;;;
CH 417;Chemical separation of ternary organic mixtures and characterization of the components. Simple one or two step preparations involving different techniques. Isolation of natural product(s).;;;;
CH 419;Separation by Soxhlet and liquid-liquid extraction. Cation and anion exchange chromatography, column, thin layer and paper chromatography, gas-liquid and gelpermeation chromatography. 
Ring over methods, fractional distillation, electro-dialysis, reverse osmosis. 

;;J.A. Dean, Chemical Separation Methods, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1970. 
B.L. Karger, L.R. Snyder and C. Horvath, An Introduction to Separation Science, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1973. 
D.J. Pasto and C.R. Johnson, Organic Structure Determination, Prentice Hall, 1969. 
;;
ME 111;Introduction to wood working, kinds of woods, hand tools and machines, pattern making,types of patterns, contraction allowance, draft and machining allowances. Principles of moulding methods, cores and core boxes. Introduction to fitting shop tools, equipment and operations. Sheet metal practice. Exercises: Simple exercises in patternmaking, moulding, fitting and sheet metal work. ;;S.K. Hajrachoudhury, Elements of Workshop Technology, Vol.I Asia Publishing House, 1986. ;;
CH 421;General chemistry of the transition elements, lanthanides and actinides including atomic nuclii and nuclear reactions, coordination chemistry including theories of metal-ligand bonding, spectral and magnetic properties, organometallic compounds of transition elements, role of trnsition metal ions in biological processes. ;;F.A. Cotton and G. Wilkinson, Advanced Inorganic Chemistry, Wiley Eastern, John Wiley, 4th Ed., 1980. 
K.F. Purcell and J.C. Kotz, An Instroduction to Inorganic Chemistry, Saunders, Philadelphia, 1980. 
J.E. Huheey, Inorganic Chemistry, 3rd Ed., Harper and Row Publ. Inc., New York, 1983. 
;;
CH 423;Reapprisal of structure, properties and reactions of alkanes, alkenes, cycloalkenes, alkadienes, benzenoid, non-benzenoid, poly-nuclear aromatic and pseudo-aromatic hydro-carbons and their mono-functional derivatives with due emphasis on stereochemistry and mechanism. 
Further to this, the stereochemical outcome and mechanistic rationalization of addition of electrophilic reagents to conjugate diene, tne Diels-Alder reaction, reversible and irreversible addition to the carbonyl group, reductive deoxygenation of carbonyl compounds compound reactions via enol intermediates, reactions of enolate ions, decarboxylation, reduction of the carboxyl and nitrogroups and the reaction at the a-carbon atom of carboxylic acid, interactions involving the hydroxyl/amino groups and Michael condensa- tions will be discussed in depth. Organic nitrogen compounds - amines, amides, nitriles azo, diazo and related compounds will also be convered. 

;;J.D. Roberts and M.C. Caserio, Basic Principles of Organic Chemistry, W.A. Benjamin Inc., 1964. 
J.B. Hendrickson, D.J. Cram and G.R. Hammond, Organic Chemistry, McGraw Hill Book Co.,3rd Ed., 1970. 
;;
CH 425; Postulates of quantum mechanics. Variation and parturbation methods. Wave function of many election systems. Born-Oppenimer approximation. Introduction to symmetry. M.O. theory of H2+, H2. Homonuclear and heteronuclear diatomic molecules, S, C, F, equations and M.O. energies. V.B. Theory and iits applications to diatomic molecules. Polyatomic molecules - M.O. theory. Walsh M.O. diagram and molecular shapes. V.B. theory, hybridisation, resonance, electron- pair repulsion and molecular geometry. 
Hellmann-Feynman theorem, a physuical picture of chemical bond molecular shapes. Simple crystal field and ligand field theories Jahn- Teller effect a-electron theory of organic molecule aromaticity and antiaromaticity. Resonances theory. 

;;Coulson"s Valence, Roy McWeeny, Oxrord Univ. Press, 1979. 
Valency Theory, J.N. Murell, S.F.A. Kettle and J.M. Tedder, ELBS, John Wiley and Sons Ltd., London, 1974. 
The Chemical Bond, J.N. Murrell, S.F.A.Kettle and J.M. Tedder, John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, N.Y., Toranto, 1978. 
;;
ME 112;Introduction to safety measures, introduction to the principles of working, construction, operation, types of cutting tools, selection of cutting speeds and feeds etc. regarding basic machine tools e.g. lathe, shaping, slotting, milling and grinding machines, etc. Introduction to gas and arc welding processes, soldering and brazing. 
Exercise; Simple jobs on centre lathe and shaping machcines and welding. 

Demonstrations; Slotting, milling and grinding machines. 

;;S.K. Hajrachoudhury, Elements of Workshop Technology, Vol. II Asia Publishing House, 1986. 
;;
CH 427;Thermodynamic functions (S, G, U, etc.), equilibria. Partial molal quantities. Phase equilibria. Non-ideal solutions. Mixing and excess functions. Canonical ensembles, MB, BE and FD distributions. 
Partition functions and their relationships to thermodynamic properties. Chemical equilibrium. Virial coefficients. 

Introduction to non-equilibrium thermodynamics. Onsager"s reciprocity relations. 

;;F.T. Wall, Chemical Thermodynamics, W.H. Freeman and Co., 1965. 
G.W. Castellan, Physical Chemistry, 3rd Ed., Naroso Publishing House, New Delhi, 1985 
P.W. Atkins, Physical Chemistry, 3rd Ed.,1990. 
J.F.Lee, F.W. Sears and D.L.Turcote, Statistical Thermodynamic, McGraw Hill, 1968. ;;
CH 429; Evaluation of reliability of analytical data and statistics in chemical analysis. Expression of results to significant figures. 
Sampling and preparation of sample for analysis. Introduction to optical methods, ultraviolet, visible, infrared spectrophotometry and fluorometry. Atomic absorpition and flame emission spectroscopy. 

Scattering of reaidation, nephelometry, turbidimetry and Raman Spectroscopy. Electroanalytical methods such as voltammetry, polarography, amperometry, conductometry and high frequency titrations. Thermogravimetry and differential thermal analysis. Introduction to interphase separations with special reference to chromatography. Gas chromatography and HPLC. 

;;H.A. Laitinen and W.A. Harris, Chemical Analysis, 2nd Edn. McGraw-Hill, 1975. 
G.W.Ewing, Instrumental methods of chemical analysis, 5th Edn., McGraw-Hill, 1985. 
H.H.Willard, L.L.Merrit, J.A. Dean and F.A. Settle, Instrumental Methods of Analysis, 6th Edn., Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1980. 
;;
ME 115;Geometry of consturction of simple plane figures. Free hand sketching. Drawing scales. Graphical communication through multiple projections, missing views. Simple projection of points, lines and planes. Orthographic projection of simple solids in simple positions. 
Sections of solids-I.S.I. Conventions. 

;;N.D. Bhatt, Elementary Engineering Drawing Charotar Publishers, Anand, 1979. 
;;
CH 481; Organization of computers, algorithms, programming in Fortran, Use of standard libraries Numerical analysis interpolation curve fitting, roots of equations, matrix oprations, integration, optimisation. Computations for molecular spectra, molecular motions, charge densities, X-ray structures, conformational analysis and organic synthesis. ;;D.D. McCracken, Guide to Fortran IV Programming, 2nd Ed., Wiley, 1972. 
T.R. McCalla, Introduction to Numerical Methods and Fortran Programming Wiley, 1977. 
T.L. Isenhour and P.G. Jurs, Introduction to Computer Programming for Chemistry, Allyn and Bacon, 1972. 
;;
CH 422;Chemistry of non-transition elements, stereochemistry and bonding in non-transition elementa and compounds, solutions solvents, acids and bases, brief review of inorganic chains, rings and cages, organometallic compounds of non-transition elements, role of non-transition elements in biological processes. 
;;F.A. Cotton and G. Wilkinson, Advanced Inorganic Chemistry, John Wiley, 4th Ed.,1980. 
J.E. Huheey, Inorganic Chemistry, 3rd Ed., Harper, New York, 1983. 
K.F. Purcell and J.C. Kotz, An Introduction to Inorganic Chemistry, Saunders, Philadelphia, 1980. 
;;
CH 424;Introduction to heterocyclics and their importance. 
Nomenclature of ring system, structure, reactivity and synthesis of reduced three, four, five and six membered oxygen, nitrogen and sulphur heterocyclics; aromatic heterocyclics and polyhetero ring systems. Constitution and configuration of simple sugars, chemical reactions of monosaccharides and their cyclic anomers. 

Organo-selenium, silicon phosphorus and boron compounds and other organometallic derivatives. 
;;L.A. Paquette, Principles of Modern Heterocyclic Chemistry, W.B. Benjamin, Inc., 1978. 
J.D. Roberts and M.C. Caserio, Basic Principles of Organic Chemistry, W.A. Benjamin Inc., 1964. 
J.A.J. Joule and G.F. Smith, Heterocyclic Chemistry, ELBS, 2nd Ed., 1982. 
B.M. Acheson, An Introduction to the Chemistry Heterocyclic Compounds, Interscience, 2nd Ed., 1975. 
Raj K. Bansal, Heterocyclic Chemistry, Synthesis, Reactions and Mechanisms, Wiley Eastern Ltd., New Delhi, 1990. 
J.A.Joule and G.F. Smith, Heterocyclic Chemistry, ELBS Publications, London, 2nd Ed., 1982. 
;;
CH 426; Rate of chemical reactions, rate expressions irreversible reactions. 
Methods of determining rates and orders of reaction. Complex reactions. Collison and transition state theories of chemical reaction rates. Application to unimolecular, biomolecular solutions. Homogeneous catalysis, chain reaction. 

Photochemical reactions. Fast reactions. Diffusion in solids. Mass transfer in liquids and solutions. 

;;J.W. Moore and R.G. Pearson, Kinetics and Mechanisms, John Wiley and Sons, 1981. 
K.J.Laidler, Chemical Kinetics, Tata McGraw Hill, 1973. 
K.J.Laidler, Chemical Kinetics, 3rd ed. Harper and Row, New York, 1987. 
R.D.Levine and R.B.Bernstein, Molecular Reaction Dynamics and Chemical Reactivity, Oxford University Press, 1987. 
;;
CH 432;Complexometric titration by masking and demasking reactions. Estimations by nephelometry, fluorimetry, simultaneous spectrophotometry, atomic absorption sepectroscopy. Determination of composition of complex in solution. Synthesis and characterization of transition metal complexes (including organometallic compounds)and their study by spectral, magnetic and thermal methods. ;;;;
CH 434;Determination of the following : partial molal volumes, dipole moment, activities by freezing point, quantum yield, heats of vaporisation and solution. Velocity constant and activation energy. Electrodes with different substrates for H2 evolution, photoelectrochemical solar cells. Vacuum measurement. 
IR spectrum. Use of Huckel M.O. theory, solution of Schrodinger equation. 

;;;;
CH 440;Molecular logic of living matter. Origin of biomolecules. Cell structure. Amino acids structure, functional groups properties and reactions. Protein structure, conformation and biomolecular interactions. Sugar polysaccharides, structure. Nucleotides, nucleic acids structure and function, DNA organisation and replication, transcription, ribosomes, gentic code and protein synthesis. Enzymes-categorization, catalysis kinetics- single substrate enzyme catalyzed reactions, inhibition, Lipids-structure and properties of different classes of 1 lipids. Biomembrane organisation of membrane lipids. Membrane bound proteins-structure and properties and transport phenomenon. Bioenergetics basic principle, glycolytic pathways, Kreb"s cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, coupled processes. Photosynthesis. ;;A.L.Lehninger, Biochemistry : The Molecular Basic of Cell Structure and Function, Worth Publishers, New York, 1982. 
L. Stryer, Biochemistry, W.H. Freeman and Company, San Franbsisco, 1975. 
E.E.Con and P.K.Stumpf, Outlines of Biochmeistry, Wiley Eastern Ltd., New Delhi, 1976. 
;;
CH 442;Interaction of radiation with matter, principles of spectroscopy, lasers. 
Rotational spectra, moleculars geometries, Zeeman and Stark effects, Molecular symmetry, point groups, representions, character tables Molecular vibrations, normal mode analysis, infrared lasers, Raman Scattering, Resonance Raman Spectroscopy, time resolved spectroscopy. 

Molecular electronic spectra photophysical processes, Dye lasers. 

Magnetic resonance relaxation times, FT-NMR, spin coupling NOR, ESR, Hyperfine interactions. Mossbauer spectroscopy, chemical shifts. 

;;C.N.Banwell, Foundamentals of Molecular Spectroscopy, Tata McGraw Hill, 1983. 
W.A. Gullory, Introduction to Molecular Structures and Spectroscopy, Allyn and Bacon, 1977. 
R.S.Drago, Physical Methods in Chemistry, Sanders, 1992. 
R. Chang, Basic Principles of spectroscopy, McGraw Hill, 1971 
G.M.Barrow, Molecular Spectroscopy, McGraw Hill, 1962.;;
CH 502;Preparative chemistry of compounds of main group and transition elements including inorganic chains, rings, cages, clusters, halogen and rare gas compounds. Experimental problems encountered in the synthesis, isolation, purification, characteization and identification if inorganic compounds. 
Physical methods for characterization, PES, EXAFS, Mossbauer spectroscopy, magnetic susceptibility and cyclic voltammetry. 
;;W.L.Jolly, The Synthesis and Characterisation of Inorganic Compounds, Prentice Hall, 1970. 
R.J.Angelias, Synthesis and Techniques in Inorganic Chemistry, 2nd Edn., Saunders, 1977. 
G.Pass and H. Sutchliffe, Practical, Inorganic Chemistry: Preparation, Reactions and Instrumental Methods, 2nd Edn., Chapman and Hal, 1974. 
R.S.Drago, Physical Methods for Chemists, Saunders, 1992. 
;;
CH 505;General comparision of organic reactions carried out in the lab. 
and organic reactions observed in biological systems. 

Stereospecificiry and rate enhancement in enzyme catalysed reactions. Discussion on non-availability of electrophilic site in enzyme and tgheir presence in co-enzymes. Following reaction will be discussed (comparing the usual mechanism to enzyme catalysed mechanism) : hydrolysis of esters, amides, phosphoesters, etc. C-C and C-C bond formation, oxidation, reduction and decarboxylation. Remote functionalisation cyclisation reactions. Biomimetic reactio ns. 

Hydrophobicity, supramolecular structure, drug design. 

;;E.E.Van Tamlen (Ed), Bioorganic Chemistry, Vol. I-IV, Academic Press, 1968. 
D. Metzler, Biochemistry, Academic Press, 1977. 
;;
ME 116;Sectional views: Full half, offset applied to simple assemblies. 
Screw threads, fasters and other standard machine elements. 

Symbols for welded joints, process flow, electrical and instrumental units. etc. Exposure to tolerances, surface finish, fits etc. 

Assembly and part drawings of simple assemblies and subassemblies of machines viz. couplings,clutches, gear assemblies, tool posts, I.C. engine components, etc. 
;;N.D. Bhatt, Machine Drawing, Charotar Book Stall, Anand, 1967. 
N. Sidheshwar, P. Kanniah and V.V.S. Sastry, Machine Drawing, Tata McGraw Hill, 1983. IS 696, 1972. 
;;
CH 506;Classification of reactions. Free energy of activation and mechanism. 
Kinetic application of crystal field theory. Fast reaction techniques. Metal-ligand interactions of biological model systems. Dechelation of coordinated amino acid. The modification of ligand reactivity by complex formation (Anchimeric and template effect in corrin synthesis, hydrolysis of amino acid esters, amides and peptides, protection of amino group in amino acids.) Nucleophilic attack on Schiff bases, phosphate esters and heterocyclic base. Structural and functional properties of peroxidases and catalyses. Oxidation and reduction and substitution of Fe-S centres. Electron transfer reaction of class I Cytochromic. Inorganic reaction mechanism. Past, Present and Future. 

;;F. Basolo and Peerson, Mechanism of Inorganic Reaction Mechanism, 2nd Edn. Wiley, N.Y., 1967. 
R.G.Wilkins, The Study of Kinetics and Mechanism of Reactions of transition Metal complexes, 2nd Ed., New York,1991. 
A.G.Sykes (Ed.), Advances in Inorganic and Bioinorganic Reaction Mechanism, Vo. 1-3. 
D.B.Rorabacher and J.F. Endicolt, Mechanistic Aspects of Inorganic Reactions, ACS Symposium Series. 
;;
CH 509; Quantitative treatment of structure- reactivity correlations. 
Generalized form of linear free energy relationships. Scales for specific parameters. Hammet equation. Brown"s modification for through conjugation. Taft treatment for separation of field effect. Taft"s steric constants Grunwals-Winstein equation. 

Swiain-Scott equation. Brown"s selectivity function. General acid/base and specific lyonium/yate ion catalysis. Bronsted law. Solvent acidity. Hammett"s H and H-functions. interpretation of kinetic data, isotope effects. Anchimeric assistance. Participatin of pi and sigma bonds. Phenonium ion. Sneen"s ion pair mechanism. 

Molecular rearrangements. Kinetics of chain-reactions. Quantitative aspects of stereochemistry. Conformational analysis, Evaluation of aromaticity by spectral methods (UV, NMR), Antiaromaticity. 
;;J. Hine, Physical Organic Chemistry, 2nd Edn., McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1962. 
E.M. Koswer, An Introduction to Physical Organic Chemistry, John Wiley International Edition, 1958. 
E.L. Eliel, Stereochemistry of Carbon Compounds, McGraw Hill Kogakusha, International Students Ed. ,1962. 
J.March, Advanced Organic Chemistry, 2nd Edn., McGraw Hill, New York, 1977. 
T.H. Lowry and K.S. Richardson, Mechanism and Theory in Organic Chemistry, Harper and Row, 1976. 
;;
CH 513;Estimation of metal ions by atomic absoroption spectroscopy, spectroflurometry, flame emission spectroscopy, ion-analyser, polarography. Analysis of industrial gases by gas analyer. Synthesis of crown ether and its application in separation of s-block elements. Synthesis of inorganic and organometallic complexes and their spectral studies. Fluxional behaviour of transition metal complexes. ;;;;
CH 515;Multi-step synthesis and spectral characterization of products. Preparations involving stringent control. ;;A.I. Vogel, A Text Book of Practical Orgnic Chemistry, English Language Book, Society and Logman Group Ltd., 1971. 
;;
CH 517;Surface tension and surface energy. B.P. diagram and vapour liquid equilibrium. Curve fitting. Integral heats of solution. 
X-ray diffraction. Solid State reactions using XRD. Reistivity of solids. Thermals and mechanical behaviour of polymeric materials. 

Surface area measurements. Studies of reversible and irreversible redox reactions using rotating disc electrodes. Simulation of NMR and ESR spectra. Classical molecular dynamic simulation. 

Experiments on instrument fabrication. 

;;;;
ME 201;Fundamentals of mechanics of deformable solids. Concepts of stress and strain and their relationships. Fatigue and thermal stresses, creep. 
Equilibrium equations, strain displacement relation. Combined stresses, Mohr s circle diagram for stress and strain rosettes. 

Simple beams, bending moments, shear forces and stresses in beams. Torsion, energy methods. Theories of failure. Stresses in thin, thick cylinders and rotating discs.

;;S.H. Crandall, N.C. Dahl and S.J.Lardner : An Introduction to Mechanics of Solids, Tata McGraw Hill, 1978. 
E.P. Popov, Introduction to Mechanics of Solids, Prentice Hall, 1973. 
;;
CH 521; Mass spectrometry, the production and analysis of positive ions, molecular ions, application of isotopic abundance measurements, fragmentation modes and rearrangement of ions. Mass spectra of certain chemical classes. 
Electronic spectroscopy (UV-visible) : Simple chromophoric groups, conjugated systems, and aromatic systems. Characteristic absorption of organic and inorganic compounds. 

Infrared spectroscopy : Characteristic group frequencies of organic and inorganic molecules. Interpretation of spectra. 

Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy of compounds containing 1H, 13C, 19F and 31P nuclei. Interpretation of spectra. 

Identification of organic and inorganic compounds using combination of spectral data. 

;NIL;R.M.Silverstein, C.G. Bassler and T.C. Morril, Spectrophotometric Identification of Organic Compounds, 5th Edn., Wiley, 1991. 
W. Kemp, Organic Spectroscopy, ELBS, 1979. 
D.H. Williams and I. Fleming, Spectroscopic Methods in Organic Chemistry, 3rd Edn., McGraw Hill, 1980. 
R.S.Drago, Physical Methods for Chemists, W.B.Saunders, 1992. 
W.L.Jolly, The synthesis and characterization of Inorganic Compounds, Prentice-Hall, 1970. ;;
CH 525;Classification of ligands by donor atoms, and stability, reactivity, bond types, geometry and coordination compounds. Kinetics and mechanism of reactions of transition metal complexes : substitution reactuibsm ekectrib transfer redox processes, and acid base and related processes and inorganic photochemistry of coordination compounds. ;;F.A.Cotton and G. Wilkinson, Advanced Inorganic Chemistry, 4th Edition, Wiley,1980. 
F. Basolo and R.G. Pearson, Mechanism of Inorganic Reactions, 2nd Edition, Wiley, New York 1967. 
S.F.A.Kettle, Corordination Compounds, Appleton, New York 1969. 
;;
CH 526;Analytical absorption spectroscopy instrumentation and application of UV-visible IR spectroscopy, Raman spectrscopy in inorganic analysis. Flow injection Analysis (FIA). Atomic absorption and emission spectroscopy- inductively coupled plasma spectroscopy (ICP). Emission spectroscopy. 
Molecular Iuminiscience methods in chemical and environmental analysis. 

Optical rotatory dispersion, circular dichromism and spectropolarimetry in chemical analysis. Mass spectrometry GC-MS. Radioanalytical methods- neutron activation analysis, isotope dilution technique and use of tracer technique in analysis. 

Photoaccoustic sgectroscopy, ESCA and X-ray fluoroscence - principles and applications in chemistry. 

Ion selective electrodes - fabrication and use. 

Ion analyser. Anodic stripping voltametry polarography - DC, AC, square wave polarography and amperometry. 

On line analysers - automation in chemical analysis. 

;;D.A.Skoog, Principles of Instrumental Analysis, 3rd Edn., Holt-Saunders, Japan, 1985. 
H.H.Willard, L.L.Merritt (Jr.), J.A. Dean,F.A. Settle (Jr.), Instrument Methods of Analysis, 6th Edn, CBS Publishers and Distributors, 1986. 
G.Ewing, Instrumental Methods of Chemical Analysis, 6th Edn., McGraw-Hill, 1984. 
S.M.Khopkar, Basic Concepts of Analytical Chemistry, Wiley Eastern Ltd., 1984. 
;;
CH 527;Classification of separation methods. Liquid liquid extraction. 
Classification, formation of uncharged species, extraction equilibria, liquid ion-exchangers as extractants, synergiatic and substoichiometric extraction, CIESE, extraction with crown ethers and extraction from molten salts, extractive titrtions and techniques of extraction. 

Theory of choromatography. Ion- exchange,adsorption liquid-liquid partition and reversed phase extraction chromatography, Gas-liquid and gas-solid chromatography. Exclusion chromatography including gelpermeation and ion-exclusion, molecular sieves and membrane separation. 

Electrophoresis. Zone refining and foam separation. Ring oven technique in chemical analysis. 

;;H.A.Laitien and W.A. Harris, Chemical Analysis, 2nd Edn., McGraw Hill, 1975. 
D.G.Peters, J. Hayes and G.H. Hieftje, Chemical Separation and Measurements, W.B.Saunders Co., 1974. 
B.L.Karger, L.R. Snyder and C.Horvath, An Introduction ton Separation Science, 1973. 
J.A.Dean, Chemical Separation Methods, Van Nostrand Reinhod, 1969. 
F.W. Fifield, Principles and Practice of Analytical Chemistry, 2nd Edn., 1983. 
;;
CH 528;Terpenoids : Classification structure and chemistry of some important mono-sesquidi, sester-,and triterpenes; biogenesis. 

Steroids : Sterols and bile acids, esrrogens, androgens gestogens and adrenocortical hormones : hormone production; cardiac glycosides, steroidal triterpenes; biogenesis of steroids and correlation with terpenoids. 

Alkaloids : Characteristic reactions, general methods of degradation, structure and chemistry of some well-known alkaloids. 

Natural Pigments : Flavones, flavanones, isoflavones xanthones, quinones, pterins, chlorophyll and haemin. 

Carbohydrates : Stereochemistry, reaction and conformation of monosaccharides, deoxy and aminosugars, hexonic acid and vitamin C, disaccharides, polysaccharides, inositol; gangliosids and other glycosides. Any three of the above topics will be covered. 

;NIL;I.L.Finar, Organic Chemistry, Vol.2, 5th Edn., ELBS, 1975. 
A.A.,Newmann, Chemistry of Terpenes and Terpenoids, Academic Press, 1972. 
C.W.Shoppee, Chemistry of the Steroids, 2nd Edn., Butterworths, 1964. 
S.W. Pelletier, Chemistry of the Alkaloids, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1970. 
T.A.Geissman, Chemistry of Flavonoid Compounds,Pergamomn Press, 1962. 
R.D.Guthrie and John Honeyman, An Introduction to the Chemistry of Carbohydratres, 3rd Edn., Clarendon Press, 1968. 
K. Nakanishi, T. Goto, S.,Ito, S. Najori and S. Nozoe,Natural products Chemistry, Vol. 1 and 2 Academic Press, 1974. 
;;
ME 202;Statically indeterminate problems in bending. Unsymmetrical bending problems, curved bars, Castigliano s theorem and its applications. Laterally and axially loaded beams. Deflection of beams. 

Theory of plates and shells. Introduction to theory of elasticity and photoelasticity. 

;ME 201 (Exposure);S.P. Timonshenko, Strength of Materials Vol.I and II, CBS Publishers and Distributors, 1986. 
S.P. Timonshenko and J.N. Goodier, Theory of Elasticity, McGraw Hill,1970 <UL>;;
CH 529;Types of solids, lattice and structure, common structures of elements and compounds, point defects and dislocations, free electron and band theories of solids, intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductivity, surface states, contact potential, p-n and n-p-n junctions. 
Surface forces, adsorption, double layer formation, thermodynamic treatment of surfaces, catalysis, electrocatalysis, thermodynamics of colloids. 

;;G.I.Epifanore, Solid State Physics Mir Publishers, 1979. 
L.V.Azaroff and J.J.Brophy, Electronic Processor in Material, Academic Press, 1963. 
D.K.Chakrabarty, Adsorption and Catalysis, IIT-Bombay, 1981. 
J.O"M. Bockris and D. Drazic, Electrochemical Science, Taylor and Francis, London, 1972. 
A.W. Adamson, Physical Chemistry of Surfaces, 3rd Edn., Wiley Interscience, 1976. 
A. Clerk, The Theory of Adsorption and Catalysis, Academic Press, 1970. 
H.V.Keer, Principles of the Solid State, Wiley Eastern, 1993. 
;;
CH 540;A brief history of medicinal chemistry. Drug receptor interactions. 

Approaches to drug design. Drug metabolism. A few drugs from each of the following groups will be discussed. 

Analgesics, antidepressants, antipsdychotics, antiinflammatory agents, cardiovascular agents, diuretics, antibacterials, antibiotics, antivirals, antimalarials, antiamoebics, drugs for neoplastic deseases. 

Vitamins : A, B1,B2, B6 niacin, folic acid, dantothenic acid, biotin, B12,C,D,E,and K. Hormones : Thyroid hormones and antithyroid drugs. 

Steroid hormones and some important steroidal drugs. 

;NIL;A. Burger, Medicinal Chemistry, 4th Ed., Wiley Interscience, 1981. 
R.F.Doerge, Ed., Wilson and Gisveld"s Text Book of Organic Medicinal and Pharmaceutical chemistry, 8th Ed., J.B. Lippincott Co., 1982. 
D. Lednicer and L.A. Mitscher, The Organic Chemistry of Drug Synthesis, Wiley Interscience, 1977. 
O.L.Salerini, Natural and Synthetic Organic Medicinal Compounds, C.V. Mosby Co., 1976. 
;;
CH 541;Classification of dyes. Classification and nature of fibre; Dye intermediates prepared from benzene, naphthalene and antharquinones, Azodyes : Diazotisation of amines and their coupling reaction, simple azodyes, benzidine dyes, anthrauinone azo dyes, indanthrene and benzanthrone dyes. Indigoids, thiondigoids and sulphur dyes. 

Triarylmethane dyes. Miscellaneous dyes. Methine and polymethine dyes, phthalcocyanine dyes, reactive dyes (triazine). Whitening agents (blankophor), food and flavour dyes. 

Surface-active agents: Detergents, anionic, cationic, non-ionic, amphoteric, quaternary salts. 

;NIL;E.N. Abrahart, Dyes and their Intermediates, 2nd Ed., Pergamon, 1978. 
L.F.Fieser and M. Fieser, Topics in Organic Chemistry, Reinhold, 1963. 
H.L.Hubs Ed., The Chemistry of Synthetic Dyes and Pigments, Reinhold, 1955.;;
ME 203;Introduction, fluid characteristics, continuum concept, properties of fluids, fluid statics, flow kinematics, control volume equations, flow analysis, solution of Navier-Stokes equations for some special cases, boundary layer theory, dimensional analysis. ;;S.W. Yuan, Foundations of Fluid Mechanics Prentice Hall, 1969. 
V.L. Streeter, Fluid Mechanics McGraw Hill, 1976. 
A.L. Prasuhn; Fundamentals of Fluid Mechanics, Prentice Hall, 1980. 
;;
CH 543;Brief review of electrode kinetics, mechanism of selected electrochemical reactions, electrocatalysis. Application of basic electrochemical concepts to selected industrial electrolytic cells, and to energy conversion and corroding systems. 
Structure and function of biological membranes, membrane, potential, transport across membrane, nerve conduction. 

;;L.I.Antropov, Theoretical Electrochemistry, Mir Publishers, 1972. 
J.O.M. Bockris and A.K.N. Reddy, Modern Electrochemistry, Plenum Press, 1970. 
J.O.M. Bockris and S. Srinivasan, Fuel Cells : Their Electrochemistry, McGraw-Hill, 1969. 
R. Plousey and D.G.Planning: Bioelectric Phenomena, McGraw-Hill, 1968.. 
;;
CH 545;Chemical make up and essential inorganic elements of organism. 
Metallobiomolecules, Transport Storage proteins, electron carier, (cytochromes (Fe), Iron-Sulfur (Fe), Blue Copper (Cu), Metal storage carrier and structural (Ferrilin (Fe), Transferrin, Ceruloplasm in (Cu), O2 binding (Myoglobin (Fe), Hemoglobin (Fe), Hemocyanin (Cy), Enzymes, Hydrolases (Carboxypeptidase (Zn),Phosphatase (Mg, Zn, Cu), Oxidoreductase (oxidase, superoxide dismutase (Cu, Zn, Mn). Nitrogenase (Fe, Mo), Isomerases and synthetases (Vitamin B-12 Co-enzymes (Co)). Non-proteins, Metal transport and structural., Siderophores (Fe), Skeletal (Ca,Si), Photoredox (Chlorophyl) (Mg), Photosystem II (Mn, Mg)cation transport in biological memberane. 

;;R.Ochiai, Allyn and Bio-Inorganic Chemistry, Becon, 1977. 
G.L.Eichorn Edn., Inorganic Biochemistry, Elsevier Scientific Publishing Co., 1973. 
M.N. Hughes, The Inorganic Chemistry of Biological Processes, Wiley, 1981. 
R.W. Hay, Bio-Inorganic Chemistry, Wiley, 1984. ;;
CH 547;Historical background, factors controlling metal carbon bond formation, methods of M-C bond formation, comparative survey of structure and bonding of metalalkyls and aryls, complexes with n acids s-CO and related ligands, complexes with olefins acetylens and related unsaturated molecules, catalytic properties of mononuclear compounds, stereochemical non-rigidity in organometallic compounds, boranes, carboranes and metallocarboranes, bimetallic and cluster complexes structure and applications in catalysis, applications of organometallic compounds in organic synthesis, enantioselective synthesis via organometallic compounds, importance of organometallic compounds in certain biological systems : ;;F.A.Cotton and G. Wilkinson, Advanced Inorganic Chemistry, 4th Edn., Wiley, 1980. 
N.N.Greenwood and A. Earnshaw, Chemistry of the Elements, lst Edn., Pergamon, 1985. 
J.E. Huheey, Inorganic Chemistry, 3rd Edn., Harper and Row, 1993. 
B.F.G. Johnson, Transition Metal Clusters, Wiley, 1980. 
G. Wilkinson, F.G.A. Stone and E. Abel, Comprehensive Organometallic Chemistry, Pergamon, 1980. 
;;
ME 304;Ideal fluid flow-potential theory, compressible fluid flow-isen- tropic flow, isothermal flow, fluid machinery, fluid pumping machines, rotodynamic and positive displacement type pumps, blowers, compressors, jet pumps, cavitation, hydroturbines, Pelton turbine, Francis turbine, Kaplan turbine, governing. 

;ME 203;V.L. Streeter, Fluid Mechanics, McGraw Hill, 1976. 
A.H. Shapiro, The Dynamics and Thermodynamics of Compressible Fluid Flow, The Ronald Press Co.1953. 
J.Lal, Hydraulic Machines, Metropolitan Book Co, 1961. 
A.J. Stepanoff, Centrifugal and Axial Flow Pumps, Wiley, 1967. 
;;
CH 549;Basic concepts, step growth and chain growth polymerization; types of polymer synthesis, bulk solution , suspension, emulsion and solid state polymerization; kinetics, initiator efficienty, auto-acceleration chain transfer, regulator, retarders and inhibitors, ceiling temperature. 

Stereochemistry of polymers, ring opening polymerization, vinyl polymerization with ionic and complex coordination catalysis. 

Copolymerization : Monomer reactivity ratios, Altrey-prdice equation, effect of monomers unit arrangements on copolyer properties, block and graft copolymers. Chemistry of acrylic polymers, fluoropolymers, polyethers. polyamides, polyesters, high temperature resistant polysulfones, polyuethanes, silicones, multiple bond addition reactions (Elastomers). Chemistry of thermoset resins : Bakelite, expoxide, glyptol. Pressure sensitive adhesives. 

;NIL;R.W.Bilmeyer, Text Book of Polymer Science, John Wiley, 1971. 
G. Odian,Principles of Polymerization, McGraw Hill, 1970. 
H.F.Mark et.al., Encylopaedia of Polymer Science and Technology, 1966 onwards. 
;;
CH 551;Nernst equation; Origin of EMF of a galvanic cell. Polarizable and non-polarizable electrodes, the electrocapillary curve, null point of metals and its determination. Thermodynamics of electrical double layer, Lipmann equation, measurement of surface excess. Models for the electrical double layer. 
Electrode kinetics.The concept of over potential. 

Electrochemical reactions under mass transfer control, chronopotentiometry,voltammetry and polarography. 

Electro chemical reactins under charge transfer control, generalized Butler Volmer equation, determination of kinetic parameters. 

Mechanism and electrocatalysis of hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions. 

;;J.O.M. Bockris and A.K.N. Reddy, Modern Electro-chemistry, Vol.1 and 2, Plenum Press, 1970. 
D.I. Antropov, Theoretical Electrochemistry, Mir Publisher, 1972. 
J. Koryta, J. Dvorak, V. Bohackova, Electrochemistry, Methuen & Co. Ltd., London,1970.;;
CH 552;Adsorption isotherms, Langmuir, BET, Frumkin, Temkin and Freundlich, adsorption on porous solids. 
Chemisorption of gases on metals and semiconductors, kinetics of adsorption processes, heterogeneous catalysis. 

Catalysis by metals, semiconductors and solid acids. 

Characterization of solid surface structure and composition using electron microscopy FEM, XPS. Auger, SIMS, ISS and LEED. 

;;A.W.Adamson, Physical Chemistry of Surfaces, 3rd Edn.,Wiley Interscience, 1976. 
A. Clark, The Theory of Adsorption and Catalysis Academic Press, 1970. 
D.K.Chakrabarty, Adsorption and catalysis by solids, Wiley Eastern, 1990. 
F.P.Kane and G.B.Larrabee (Eds.),Characterisation of solid surfaces, Plenum, N.Y.,1978. 
;;
CH 553;Operations, commutation relations and Schrodinger education. Linear harmonic oscillator and hydrogen atom in terms ladder operator. Tunnel effect. Angular momentum; spin; addition of angular momenta. Time independent and time-dependent perturbation theory; applications. Variation method; LCAO approximation, Group theory. 
Hartree and Hartree-Fock approximations Electronic Structure of many-electron atoms poyatomic molecules. 

;;P.W.Atkins, Molecular Quantum Mechanics, Vols. I and II, (Oxford University Press), 1970. 
F.L. Pilar, Elementary Quantum Chemistry, McGraw-Hill, 1968. 
R.M.Golding, Applied Wave Mechanics, D.Van Nostrand, 1969. 
J. Goodisman, Contemporary Quantum Chemistry, Plenum Press , 1977. 
;;
CH 554;Please take syb from con file 

;;;;
CH 555;Types of polymers.Molecular weight distributions. Chain length and conformation. Solution behaviour, solubility, fractionation. Thermodynamics of polymer solution, polymer solvent interactions phase separations. Tacticity, Crystallinity. 
Thermal, mechanical, rheological and electrical properties of polymers, Degree of polymerisation from kinetic data. 

Mechanisms of free radical and condensation polymerisation and copolymerisation. Degradation, stabilisation, plasticisation and Experimental techniques. 

;;F. Billemeyer, Polymer Science, Wiley, 1970. 
F. Billemeyer, Polymer Chemistry, Wiley,1964. 
Tobolsky, Polymer Science and Materials, Wiley Interscience, 1971. 
P.J.Flory, Interscience, Principles of Polymer Chemistry, Cornell University Press, 1953. ;;
CH 558;Classification of materials into metals, semiconductors and insulators. Band theory. Photoconduction. Effect of temperature and impurities Junction properties Rectification and transistor action. Sillicon, germanium and gallium arsenide as device materials. Superconductors. BSC theory. 
Superconducting magnets. Dielectrics and dielectric constant. Polarisation. Piezoelectric and ferroelectric materials. Luminiscence and phosphorescence. Phosphors Laser and maser actions. Laser and maser materials. Diapara, ferro, antiferro and ferri-magnetism. Hard and soft magnetic materials including alloys, ferrites and garnets. 

;;Solid State Chemistry and its Applications, Anthony R. West" John Wiley and Sons, l984. 
The structure and Properties of Materials, volume IV Electronic Properties, R.M. Rose, L A Shepard and J Wulff, Wiley Eastern Private Limited, New Delhi, l968. 
;;
CH 561;Chemical oxidizing agents : Oxidation at a single carbon and viscinal carbons, oxidation using transition metal oxidents, oxidations at other atoms such as sulphur, nitrogen phosphorus etc., oxidation at unfunctionalized carbons. 
Chemical reducing agents : catalytic reductions both homogenous and heterogenous, metal hybride, reuctions, dissolving metal reductions, bimolecular reductions, bimolecular reductions (e.g. Clemmensen reduction, Wolf-Kishner reduction etc.). Applications of reagents derived from compounds of silicon, boron, phosphorus, sulphur, nickel and palladium in functional group interconversion. 

;;F.A. Carey and R. J. Sundburg, Advanced Organic Chemistry, Port B, 2nd Edn., Plenum Press, New York and London, 1983. 
R.K. Mackie and D.M.Smith, Guidebook to Organic Synthesis, ELCS, 1985. 
R.L.Augustin (Ed), Reduction Techniques and Applications in Organic Synthesis, Marcel- Dkker, New York, 1968. 
R.L.Augustin (Ed), Odixations, Vol. I, Marcel-Dekker, New York, 1969. 
R.L.Augustin and D.J. Trecker (Ed), Oxidations, Vol. II, Marcel-Dekker, New York, 1991. 
;;
ME 208;Definition, standards of measurement, generalised systems transducer, intermediate and modifying elements, terminating a final state, instrument classification, calibration and curve fitting. 
Static performance characteristics, accuracy, precision, sensitivity, linearity, frictional effects, hysterisis, loading, classification of errors, data analysis and error propagation. 

Dynamic characteristics, zeroth, first and second order systems and their response to step, ramp and sinusoidal inputs. Measurement of motion, vibration, acceleration and strain. Measurement of force, torque and power. Use of manometers, transducers, and pressure gauges. Temperature measurement. Measurement of flow and velocity. 

Data acquisition systems and use of computers in experimental data analysis. 

;;E.O Doebelin, Measurement Systems Application and Design, Revised International Ed., McGraw Hill, 1975. 
B.C. Nakra and A.K. Chaudhary, Instrumentation, Measurement and Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill, 1985. 
T.G. Beckwith, and N.L. Buck, Mechanical Measurements, Addison Wesley, 1969. 
;;
CH 563;Diffusion, Lattice vibrations, heat capacity and thermal conductivity. Thermoionic emission. Ionic and superionic conductivity. Super conductivity. Polaron and hopping conduction. 
Magnetic properties including diamagnetism, paramagnetism, antiferromagnetism and ferrimagnetism.Dielectric properties including ferro and anti-ferro-electricity. Photoconductivity and luminescence. Laser and maser action. Solid state transormations, reactions, and single crystal growth. Techniques of crystal growth. 

Amorphous semiconductors. Macromolecular solids. Liquid crystals. 

;;G.I. Epifanov, Solid State Physics, Mir Publishers, 1979. 
C.Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, 5th Ed., Wiley Eastern Ltd., 1985. 
H.B.Hannay, Solid State Chemistry, Prentice Hall, Inc., 1967. 
H.V.Keer, Principles of the Solid State, Wiley Eastern, 1993. 
;;
CH 565;Environment, its characteristics and classification. Chemistry of toxic metal and non-metal polutants; organic compounds, mineral dust as pollutants, their physiological manifestation source, analysis and control. Carcinogenic compounds. Chemistry of air plllutants, their characteristics, laboratory a monitoring methods of analysis, basic principle underlying various monitoring instruments. 
Potable and industrial water, its major and minor components, their significance, characteristics and analysis, concept of dissolved oxygen biological oxygen demand. 

Basic chemistry of water treatment plant such as disinfection, filtration, coagulation etc. analysis of treated water. 

Quality of industrial waste water analysis for organic and inorganic constituents, the chemical oxygen demand. Sewage and sludge analysis treatment and disposal. Chemistry of odor, its measurements and control of radioactive waste. 

;;I.M.Kolthoff, P.J.Elving and F.J.Stross,Treaties in analytical chemistry, Part-IIIVol. 2, Interscience,1971. 
C.N.Sawyer, P.J.McCarty-Chemistry for environmental engineering, 3rd Edition,McGraw Hill Co.,1977. 
American Public Health Association, Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Waste Water, 13th Ed., New York, 1971. 
Environmental Pollutants, Selected Analytical Methods, SCOPE-6 Butterworths, 1975. 
;;
CH 567;Analysis of minerals like bauxite ilmenite, felspar, beryl and monazite, analysis of alloys such as statinless steel, brass, bronze, high purity copper lead, tin and aluminium including virgin metals. Analysis of glass and refractories commercial chemical, fertilizers and micronutrients from the soil. 
Analysis of milk and beverages, chemistry of preservatives and colouring matters in eatables, analysis of trace elements in food. 

Drug analysis, standardization and assay of important B.P., B.P.C. and I.P. drugs, Analysis of antibiotics, sulphas drugs, vitamins enzymes. Limit test, sterility test pyrogen and toxicity tests. 

Any two of the above topics will be covered. 

;;N.H.Furman and F.J. Welcher - Scott"s Standard Methods of Chemical Analysis, 6th Ed. 
D.Von. Nostrand Co., Inc. New York, 1966, Vols. I to IV. 
I.M.Kolthoff and P.J.Elving - Treatise on Chemistry, John Wiley and Sons Inc., New York, 1978, Vols. I to III. 
W.F. Hillebrand, G.E.F., Lundell, H.A. Bright and J.I. Hoffman - Applied Inorganic Analysis, 2nd Ed., New York, John Wiley and Sons Inc., New York, 1953. 
S. Siggla Ed. - Quantitative Organic Analysis via functional groups, 3rd Ed., John Wiley and Sons Inc., New York, 1972. 
;;
CH 568;Chemistry of Sign donor and pi-acceptor complexes. Ligand field and molecular orbital theories. Term diagrams in octahedral, tetrahedral and lowe symmetries. Electronic dipole selection rules, band intensities factors influencing band widths. Diechroism studies. Charge transfer spectra. Calculation of ligand field parameters. Magnetic properties of coordination compounds, basic equations of magnetic susceptibility, diamagnetism, paramagnetism, fierromagnetism and antiferomagnetism, temperature independent para- magnetism and electron declocalisation, effect of zero field splitting. ESR and NMR studies of paramagnetic complexes. ;;B.N.Figgls, Introduction to Ligand Fields, Wiley Eastern, 1976. 
A.B.P. Lever, Inorganic Electronic Spectroscopy, Elesevier, 1968. 
R.S.Drago, Physical Methods for Chemists, W.B. Saunders Co., 1992. 
;;
CH 569;Role of metal ions in biological systems. Transitional metal complexes as catalyst. Solvents, their classification and general behaviour, ion solvent interaction, moltan salts, non-aqueous solvents, liquid ammonia, hydrofloric acid, sulphur dioxide, hydrogen cyanide and acetic acid. 
Inorganic polymers and coordination polymers. Inorganic rings, chains and clusters. Solids, heteropoly and isopoly acid, chalcogens. 

Interstitial, nonstoichiometric and intermetallic compounds. 

Interchalogen compounds, pseudohalogens, compounds of inert gases. 

;;H.J.Emeleus and J.J. Anderson, Modern Aspects of Inorganic Chemistry, Von. Nostrand, 1962. 
M.Day and J.Selbon, theoretical Inorganic Chemistry, Von. Nostrand, 2nd Ed. 1980. 
W.L.Jolly, Modern Inorganic Chemistry, McGraw, Hill Co., 1984. 
R.W. Hay, Bioinorganic Chemistry, Wiley, 1984. ;;
ME 209;Thermodynamic systems, states, processes, interactions, work, heat, temperature, zeroth law, first law, reversibility, Carnot cycle, Kelvin-Plank and Clausius statements. second law, thermodynamics temperature, entropy. 
Application of first and second laws to closed and open systems. 

Properties of pure substances, ideal gas and other equations of state. Property relations, steam tables and charts, refrigerant charts, generalised compressibility charts. Principle of corresponding states. 

Combined first and second laws. Lost work, availability and exergy. Thermodynamics of mixtures, properties of mixtures. 

Combustion stoichiometry, energy conversion cycles for power and refrigeration, classification, ideal and real cycles, efficiency and coefficient of performance. 

;;W.C. Reynolds, Thermodynamics, Kogakusha, 1968. 
N.W. Zemansky, Heat and Thermodynamics, McGraw Hill, 1968. 
;;
CH 570;Generation, monochromotisation, adsorption and scattering, of x-ray, electrons and neutrons. Atomic scattering factors, scattering lengths, structure factor and the effects of thermal vibration in crystals. Reciprocal lattice. Systematic absences. Polarisation and magnetic scattering of neutrons. Powder, rotation, moving film, LEED and electron microscopy methods. 
Electron with the diffraction pattern. The phase problem and its solution. Patterson Fourier method of refining crystal structures and the R factor. 

Selected applications of the above to the study of symmetry, order disorder phenomenon, biochemistry and magnetic materials will be discussed. 

;;M.J.Buerger, Contemporary Crystallography, McGraw-Hill, 1970. 
G.E.Bacon, Neutron Physics,Wykecham, London, 1969. 
L. Koeter and Steyerl, Neutron Physics, Springer-Verlang, 1977. 
B.E.P. Beostan, R.W.Horne and Roy Markham, Electron Diffraction and Optical Diffraction Techniques, Elsevier, N.Y., 1973. ;;
CH 572;Type of elastomers; Thermally stable elastomers; Thermoplastic eleatomers, purpose elastomers as engineering materials; Polyblends; Effect of crystallinity branching etc. on properties of elastomers; Theory of rubber elasticity; rheology of elastomers; Dynamic behaviour. Mechanism of vulcanization/curing by sulfur and non sulfur compounds. Compounding; plasticizers, lubricants, stabilizers and fillers (Standard formulations), standard testing methods. ;;F.R.Eirich, Science and Technology of Rubber Academic Press, 1978. 
Bristow, G.W. and Waston, W.F.; The chemistry and physics of rubber like substances, Maclaren, London, 1063. 
Kraus, G., Reinforcement of elastomers, Reinhold, New York, 1965. 
Brydson, J.A., Rubber Chemistry, Applied Science, London, 1978. 
;;
CH 580;Trace analysis,classification of various methods of trace analysis, brief review of methods for the separation and isolation of traces of elements. 
Colorimetry and spectrophotometry in trace analysis, chromogenic ligands and survey of selected methods of analysis. 

Analytical atomic and molecular spectroscopic methods of analysis of metals forming refractory oxides by graphite furnace and vapor generation techniques, transition metal analysis. 

Radiochemical methods involving irradition with neutrons and mesurements of activity : methods using dilution of isotopes with nonactive materials. 

Analysis at picogram concentration of metals involving molecular luminiscence such as fluoroscence methods and quenching. 

Analysis by chemiluminiscence and X-ray fluoroscence nondestructive methods, ring oven technique. 

Metal chelates in gas chromatography. 

Electro-analyticl,techniques such as cyclic voltametry, pulse polarography, stripping voltametry and related techniques. Analysis of high purity materials at p p b and p p t levels, analysis of samples from environmental and life and earth sciences. 

;;E.B.Sandell, Colorimetric Determination of Traces of Metals, 3rd Ed., Interscience, New York, 1968. 
G.H. Morrison Ed., Trace Analysis : Physical Methods, John Wiley and Sons Inc., New York, 1965. 
G.L.Wilson and D.W. Wilson, Ed., Comprehensive Analytical Chemistry, New York, Elsevier Publishing Co., Inc., 1964. 
G.F.Kirkbright and M.T. Sargent, Atomic Absorption and Fluorscence Spectroscopy, Academic Press London, 1974. 
;;
CH 582;Introduction to Inorganic Photochemistry . Photochemical Laws and photochemical kinetics. Photophysical processes. The electronic absorption spectra of inorganic compounds. 
Characteritics of the electronically excited states of inorganic compounds. Photoelectochemistry of exicted state redox reactions. Photosensitization. Inorganic photochemical reactions; substitution, decomposition and fragmentgation, rearrangement, and redox reactions. Selective inorganic photochemistry using laser beams. Inorganic photochemistry in biological processes and their model studies. 

;;K.K.Rohatagi, Mukherjee, Fundamentals of Photochemistry, Wiley Eastern, 1978. 
V. Balzani and V. Carasiti, Photochemistry of Co-ordination compounds, Academic Press,1970. 
M.S.Wrighton, Inorganic and Organometallic photochemistry, ACS Pub.,1978. 
G.L.Geoffrey and M.S. Wrighton, Organometallic Photochemistry, Academic Press, 1979. 
;;
CH 583;General considerations - techniques in identifying intermediates, classification and properties of the intermediates. 

Generation and reactions of carbenes, carbenoids, nitrenes, arynes, ketenes, sulphenenes and sulfines. Genration of intermediates related to carbonium ions and those with electron deficient hetero atoms and their intramolecular rearrangements. Preparation of enamines, heteroenamines, ynamines, enaminones and their reactions. Ambidianions and their reactions. 

;NIL;S.P.McManus, Organic Reactive Intermediates, Academic Press, 1973., 
T.L.Gilchrist and C.W.Rees, Carbenes, Nitrenes and Arynes, Appleton-Century Crofts, 1969. 
;;
ME 210;Introductory concepts. Modes of heat transfer and basic equations. 

General differential equation of heat conduction. Simple steady and unsteady state solutions. Fins. Numerical solution. Radiant heat transfer. Stefan-Boltzmann law and Planck s law. Emissivity and absorptivity. Radiant exchange between surfaces. Shape factors for simple configurations. 

Convective heat transfer. General differential energy equation and boundary layer simplification. Elementary solutions in laminar, free and forced convections. Empirical correlations in turbulent flow. Heat exchangers. LMTD and effectiveness NTU methods. 

;ME 209 (Exposure);S.P. Sukhatme, A Text book on Heat Transfer, Orient Longman, 1979. 
;;
CH 587;Concepts of symmetrization, umpolung and selectivity and specificity (stereo, regio and chemo). Antithetic and metathetic approaches. 
Selective introduction and manipulation of functional groups. 

Selectivity in functional groups reactions, activating, protecting and blocking of groups. C-C bond forming reactions-cyanohydrin formation, organometallic addition, Wittig and related reactions, halomethane addition, nucleophilic substitution, Aldol condensation, enolate alkylation, Friedel-Crafts reaction, Michael reaction. Claisen condensation. Cope and Claisen rearrangements, inter- and intra molecular Diel"s-Alder reactions, Barbier Weland degradation, Dickmann and acyloin condensation, directed aldol condensation,conjugate addition and annulation reactions. Applications of the above methodologies in the synthesis of key synthones and other molecules. 

;;W.Caruthers, Some Methods of Organic Synthesis, Cambridge University Press, 1978. 
H.O.House, Modern Synthetic Reactions, 2nd Ed., W.A.Benjamin, 1972. 
R.O.C. Norman, Principles of Organic Synthesis, 2nd Edn., Methuen and Co. Ltd., 1972. 
S.Warren, Designding Organic Synthesis, John Wiley and Sons, 1980. 
;;
ME 211;Assembly and production drawings indicating tolerances, surface finish etc. in detail. Exercise involving use of ISI conventions in drawing. Creative sketching and detailed drawing of simple assemblies. Exercises involving process equipment, process flow, control diagrams. ;;N.D. Bhatt, Elementary Engineering Drawing, Charotar, 1979. 
;;
CH 589;Classification and investigation of reaction mechanisms. Thermal and photochemical activation. Photochemical laws, general characteristics of photochemical reactions. Nature of electronically exicited states. Energy and geometry of exicted states. Concerted and stepwsie reactions. FMO and PMO treatments. 

Electronic orbital symmetries. Conservation of orbital symmetry. 

Correlation diagrams. Woodward Hoffman"s rule of pericyclic reactions, Electrocyclic reactions, cycloaddition and related reactions. Sigmatropic rearrangements and other group migration reactions. Study of selected photochemical reactions. 

;NIL;A.Gilbert and J. Baggot, Essentials of Molecular Photochemistry, Blackwell, Scientific Publications, 1992. 
T.L.Glichrist and R.C.Storr, Organic Reactions and Orbital symmetry, Cambridge University, 1978. 
I.Fleming, Frontier Orbitals and Organic Chemkical Reactions, Wiley, 1977. 
C.H.Depuy and O.C. Chapman, Molecular Reactions and Photochemistry, Prentice Hall, 1970. 
N.J.Turro, Modern Molecular Photochemistry, Benjamin/Commings, 1978. 
;;
ME 213;Manufacturing and fitting of a machine subassembly according to given specification by groups of students. 

;ME 111, ME 112;S. Fomin, Handbook of Lathe Operator and Foreman, Mir Publishers, 1968. 
;;
CH 801;Symmetry in nature. Structural regularity in Chemistry, Elements of group theory. Group theory and quantum mechanics. Symmetry principles in structural and bonding theories of molecules. 
Aromatic and antiaromatic molecules. Molecular geometry; Jahn- Teller and Renner effects; dipole moments. Symmetry group for a non-rigid molecule. 

Conservation of orbital symmetry in pericyclic reactions. 

Symmetry in inorganic reactions. Symmetry rules for transition states. Spin symmetry restrictions in reaction path. Time reversal symmetry. 

Symmetry in the interaction of radiation with matter. Transition probability and selection rules; normal modes of vibration; symmetry in electronic, nmr and esr spectra; symmetry rules governing the relation of polarisability, susceptibility, etc. to macro-scopic phenomena like optical and magnetooptical activity, birefringence and piezo-electricity. Symmetry in a wider perspective. Phase transition; conservation laws, acci-dental degeneracy and hidden symmetry; superselection rules. 
;;G. Davidson, Introductory Group Theory,Elsevier, l97l. 
J.M. Holias, Symmetry in Molecules, Chapman and Hall, l972. 
F.A. Cotton, Chemical Applications of Group Theory, Interscience, l97l. 
D. Bishop, Theory and Chemistry, Oxford University Press, l974. 
G.B. Gill and M.R. Willis, Pericyclic Reactions, Halstead Press, l974. 
;;
ME 212;Standards of length. Methods of measuring lengths and angles. 
Tolerance and limit systems. Flatness, squareness, parallelism and alignment. Surface finish, related experiments. 

Measurements of pressure, temperature and flow . Measurement of stress, strain, displacement and acceleration. Demonstration of operational amplifier and computerized data acquisition system. 

;;J.W.F. Galyer and C.R. Shotbolt, Metrology for Engineers, Cassel, 1974. Others same as for ME 208.
;;
CH 802;Fundamentals of chemical thermodynamics, Statistical mechanical interpretation of the thermodynamic laws, Entropy and probability. 
Free energy. Partition functions. Partition function and equilibrium constant. Arrheneous and Eyring equations. Elements of absolute rate theory. Free energy and entropy of activation. 

Qualitative correlations between reaction rate and equilibria. 

Linear free energy and other `extra-thermodynamic" relationships. 

Structural effects on rate and equilibria in organic systems; substituents and solvent effects. The Hammett and Taft equations; conformational equilibria in acyclic compounds. Structural effects on rate and equilibria in inorganic systems : Linear free energy relationship in ligand substitution kinetics; nucleophilicity scales; nucleophilic discrimination factor and intrinsic reactivity of a complex in ligand substitution kinetics. 

Mechanochemical phenomena - the mechanism and rate of mechanical polymer degradation in solution; highly ordered fluid structure as a reaction medium; mechanochemistry of non-crystalline and partly crystalline fibres. 

;;J.E. Lefler and E. Grunwald, Rates and Equilibria of Organic Reactions, Wiley, l963. 
J. Hine, Structural Effects on Equilibria in Organic Chemistry, 2nd Ed. McGraw-Hill,1962. 
F. Basolo and R.G. Pearson, Mechanism of Inorganic Reactions, Interscience-Wiley, 2nd Edition, Wiley, l967. 
;;
ME 214;Measurement of viscosity, experiment to distinguish flow regimes, pressure measurement techniques. Flow measurement, resistance to fluid motion in internal flows, minor losses. Efficiency of diffusers and nozzles. Flow around a circular cylinder, analog method. ;;;;
CH 804;NMR parameters; nuclear spin properties of elements; spin-spin coupling; Bloch equation; the rotating frame of reference. Basic high resolution NMR spectrometer; pulsed NMR spectrometer; gating and pulse programming; free induction decay; Fourier analysis and fourier transform; fast fourier transforms; instrumental requirements, computer hardware and software of data aquisition and processing; a typical software; optimisation of parameters. 
Nuclear spin relaxation; auto-correlation and spectral density functions; NOE; relaxation mechanism, quantitative aspects and dynamic experiments; methods of Tl and T2 measurements. 

Spin echo; multiple pulse techniques; rotating frame experiments; chemical rate processes. 

Double resonance in proton and carbon-13 NMR; gated decoupling; specific pulse sequences for DEFT, WEFT, INEPT, etc. Assignment techniques in CMR; quantitative aspects in CMR. NMR of other nuclei such as 2H, 15N, 19F, 2Sim 31P etc. Two dimension J. Spectroscopy. Demonstration-cum-project. 
;;Edwin D. Becker, High Resolution NMR, Academic Press, l968. George C. Levy, Editor, Topics in Carbon-13 Spectroscopy, Vol. l, John Wiley and Sons, l974 and vol. II, John Wiley and Sons, l976. F.W. Wehril and T. Wirth in `Interpretation of carbon-13 NMR Spectra", Hyden, London, l978. R.S. Drago, Physical Methods in Chemistry, 2nd ed., W.B. Saunders Co., l992. 
;;
CH 805; Structure and symmetry point group. Stereo-isomerism-optical isomerism, racemic modification, diastereoisomers, torsional isomerism, atropisomers, absolute configuration, conformational analysis, conformational and reactivity. Stereo-chemistry of ring systems. Fused rings, allenes, macromolecules tricovalent carbon. 
Optical rotatory dispersion, circular dichroism and their application. Stereospecific and stereo-selective synthesis. 

Stereochemistry and mechanism of reactions. 

;;E.L. Eliel, Stereochemistry of Carbon Compounds, McGraw Hill, l962. 
Kurt Mislow, Introduction to Stereochemistry 2nd Ed.,Benjamin,l966. ;;
CH 806;Photochemical laws, Electronic absorption, Spectra of atoms and molecules. Nature of electronically excited states. Electronic energy transfer in solution and its applications to photochemistry. 
Experimental methods in photochemistry. Study of selected photochemical reactions. Photochemistry of vision. Photosynthesis. 

Photochromism. Bioluminescent and Photo-luminescent reactions. 

Excited states in organized media. 

;;N.J. Turro, Modern Molecular Photochemistry, Benzamin/Cummings, l978. 
A.A. Lamola and N.J. Turro, Energy Transfer and Organic Photochemistry, Wiley Inter-science, l969. 
Selected Readings from Advances in Photo-chemistry Eds. W.A. Noyes Jr., J.N. Pitts Jr., G.S. Hammond, K. Gollnick and H. Volman, Interscience, l953 to-date. 
R.L. Drisco and D.W. Cowan, Elements of Photochemistry, Plenum, l976. 
D.B. Smith (Sr. Reporter), Photochemistry, A specialist Periodical Report Royal Society of Chemistry, London, 1968 todate. ;;
CH 807; Strategy and design of orgnic synthesis. Concepts of synthetic equivalent and umpolung. Selective introduction and manipulation of functional groups, protective groups. Applications of following reactions : Formation of carbon-carbon single bond. Enolate anions, enamines, directed aldol reactions, thio-carban-ions, lithium cuprates, organosilanes, palladium and nickel complexes, carbenoids, photocylisations. Photochemical methods in organic synthesis. 
Formation of carbon-carbon double bond. Wittig and related reactions, oxidative decarboxylation, tolune-sulphonyl hydrazone decomposition, reductive additions to triple bond, fragmentation reactions. 

Pericyclic reactions. Cycloadditions sigma-tropic rearrangements, electrocyclic and ene reactions. Free radical reactions. Remote functionalisation, biaryl coupling. Oxidation reactions. Selective oxidation of olefins, alcohols, carbonyl compounds. 

Reductive reactions : Catalytic hydrogenations, dissolving metal reductions, hydride transfer reactions etc. 

Example of stereospecific and enantioselective synthesis of organic compounds. 

;;W. Caruthers, Some Modern Methods of Organic Synthesis, 2nd Edn., Cambridge University Press, l978. 
H.O. House, Modern Synthetic Reactions, 2nd Edn., W.A. Benjamin, l972. 
J.D. Coyle, Ed., Photochemistry in Organic Synthesis, Royal Society of Chemistry, London, l986. 
R.O.C. Norman, Principles of Organic Synthesis, 2nd Edn., Methuen and Co., l972. 
I. Fleming, Selected Organic Syntheses, Wiley, l973. 
F.A. Carey and R.J. Sundberg, Advanced Organic Chemistry, Part B : Reactions and Synthesis, Plenum, l984. ;;
CH 820;Review of the principles and applications of the following for structure analysis : Electron microscopy, electron diffraction, X-ray diffraction and neutron diffraction. Advanced methods of X-ray data collection and solving the phase problem. Patterson function, image seeking functions and their use in structure analysis. 
Refinment of crystal structures. Low energy electron diffraction technique of structure analysis. Fluid diffraction patterns and structure dynamics. Methods of neutron diffraction : data collection, structure analysis and refinement. Use of polarised neutron beams in structure analysis. 

;;M.J. Buerger, Contemporary Crystallography, McGraw Hill, l970. 
G.H. Stout and L.H. Jenson, X-ray Structure, Mcmillan, l968. 
;;
ME 302;Design of shafts, clutches, belts 
and chain drives. 

Design of speed reducers, gear boxes and variable speed drives. 

Design of hydrodynamic and hydrostatic bearings. Selection of rolling element bearings and springs. Lubrication and wear considerations. 

;ME 301(Exposure);M.F. Spotts, Design of Machine Elements, Allen and Unwin, 1961. 
P. Orlov, Fundamentals of Machine Design, Mir Publishers, 1980. 
K. Lingaiah, Machine Design Data Book. Suma Publishers, 1983. 
J.F. Shigley, Machine Design, McGraw Hill, 1986. ;;
CH 824;Metal carbonyls and other complexes with pi-acceptor ligands. 
Metal to metal bonds and metal atom clusters. Transition metal complexes with bonds to hydrogen, alkyls, alkenes and other related compounds. The role of insertion, oxidative addition, reductive elimination, associative dissociative reaction in catalysis. The use of organotransition metal complexes for conversion of unsaturated and related compounds. 

;;F.A. Cotton and G. Wilkinson, Advanced Inorganic Chemistry, Wiley, l988. 
R.F. Heck, Organotransition Metal Chemistry, Wiley, l974. 
J.K. Kochi, Organometallic Mechanisms and Catalysis, Academic, l979. 
J.P. Collman and L.S. Hogedul, Principles and Applications of Organotransition Metal Chemistry, Wiley, l980. 
;;
CH 825;Trace elements in biology, metals and metabolism. Interactions of metal ions with biopolymers and their studies by modern spectroscopic techniques. Structures and functions of metalloproteins and metallo-enzymes, synthesis and study of chemical models mimicking their functional properties. Photosynthesis, artificial photosynthesis, biocatalytic hydrogen production. Nitrogen fixation and related systems. ;;D.A. Philips, Metal and Metabolism, Clarendion l976. 
B.L.Vallee and W.E.C.Walkar, Metalloproteins, Academic, l970. 
R.K. Clayton, Photosynthesis, Cambridge University, l980. 
T.G. Spiro Ed., Metal Ions In Biology, A Wiley, Interscience Series, l980 onwards. 
;;
CH 827; Molecular structure, point groups and character tables. Angular overlap and molecular orbital theories. Infrared, electronic, electron spin resonance and nuclear magnetic resonance spectra of metal complexes. Stability of inorganic complexes of macrocyclic ligands. 
Kinetics and mechanism of reactions of metal complexes emphasizing electron transfer and photochemical reactions. 

;;F.A. Cotton and G. Wilkinson, Advanced Inorganic Chemistry, Wiley, l988. 
R.S. Drago, Physical Methods in Chemistry, Saunders, l992. 
R.G. Wilkins, The Study of the Kinetics and Mechanism of Reaction of Transition Metal Complexes, Allyn and Bacon, l974. 
M.S. Wrighton, Inorganic and Organometallic Photochemistry, ACS Publications, l978. ;;
CH 828; Magnetic properties of Nuclei, NMR relaxation chemical shifts and shielding. Blocks equation. CW and FTNMR. Correlation function and correlation time. Relaxation types and mechanism of relaxation. 
Double resonance. Chemical exchange. Shielding mechanism, chemical and paramagnetic shifts. Spin-spin splitting analysis of firsr order and complex NMR spectra. Simulation experimental method. Determination of NMR. CW and FT NMR multiple irradiation. Correlation spectroscopy. Relaxation time measurement. Self diffusion coefficient measurement. Multiple pulse NMR experiment. NOE. WEFT. Chemically induced dynamic nuclear polarization. Biomolecular interactions. Quadrupole nuclei. 

Determination of order parameter. 

Origin of mass spectra, basic principles of chemical ionizations, field desorption and plasma desorption mass spectrometry. GC-MS; Ion-beam electron impact and plasma desorption mass spectrometry. Their applications in determining the structure of organic molecules. 

Basic Principles, definitions and units of ORD and CD. Applications of various empirical and semi-empirical rules in determining the chirality of the organic molecules. 

;;G.C./ Levy, Topics in Carbon l3-NMR Spectrometry, Vols. I, II. John Wiley, l974, l976. 
T.L. Jame, Nuclear Magnetic Resonances in Biochemistry, Academic Press, l975. 
Budgikiewic and Williams Holder Ray, Mass Spectrometry by C. Dierassi, l968. 
;;
CH 829;Electron spin, Pauli principle, Orbital angular moment and origin of magnetism and susceptibility. Classification of magnetic groups dia-, ferro-, antiferro- and ferr-magnetism. 
Atomic and molecular dia- and para-magnetism, magnetism and chemical bonding, Pauli paramagnetism in metals. Exchange interaction in the solid state; molecular field theory and ordering of magnetic moments. Magnetochemistry as a method of investigating structure of coordination and organic compounds. 

Experimental methods of determining the magnetic succeptibility and magnetization properties. Magnetic materials. 

;;J.B. Goodenough, Magnetism and Chemical Bond, Interscience, l968. 
R.P. Feynman, R.B. Senghton and M. Sands. The Feynman, Lectures on Physics, Vol. II, Addison Wesley, l964. 
A. Earnshaw, Introduction to Magnetiochemistry, Academic Press, l968. 
J.C. Anderson, Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, Chapman and Hall, l968. 
;;
CH 831;Safety methods in chemistry laboratories, techniques of glass- blowing, high vacuum and temperature control; instrumentation and operation of UV-vis and IR spectrophotometers, fluorescence and AA spectrometer, NMR, GC, HPLC, XRD and other techniques (about l2 assignments). Applications, data handling and interpretation of selected 6 techniques from above (6 assignments). Experiments specialized to the area of proposed research field (6 assignments). ;;Lab. Manuals/Instrument Manuals of Equipments available in the Department. ;;
ME 303;Application of engineering science to energy conversion systems. 

Combustion principles and their applications. New power generation concepts such as fuel cells and MHD. Constructional details and working principles of different types of SI and CI engines. Two and four stroke cycles, carburetion and fuel injection system, knock phenomena, ignition requirements, mixture requirements, performance characteristics. Modern developments in I.C. engines. Economic and pollution aspects. 

Gas turbine cycles, regeneration, reheat and intercooling. 

Performance characteristics of gas turbine power plants in various applications. Basic components. Turbojet engine performance. 

;ME 209, ME 210;M. Khovakh, Motor Vehicle Engines, Mir, Moscow, 1979. 
E.F. Obert, Internal Combustion Engines, Analysis and Practice, International Text Book Co., 1968. 
H. Cohen, C.F. Rogers and H.I.H. Survana Mutto, Gas Turbine Theory, Longman, 1972. ;;
CH 840;Enzymes-structure and conformation. Physical and chemical methods as structural probes of active site of enzymes. Affinity mechanism. Enzyme models. Clinical, medical and industrial use of enzymes. Rational drug design via enzyme inhibitors. Bioactivation of prodrugs by enzymes. Coenzyme A. Biotin Thiamine diphosphate. 
Pyridoxal phosphate, suicide enzyme inhibitor. Hydrogen transfer coenzymes. Flavin coenzymes. Tetrahydro-folic acid. Dihydrofolate reductase. Anti-cancer agents. B12 coenzyme. Poisons as antagonists of PLP enzymes. Analogues of coenzymes. 
;;D. Metzer, Biochemistry, Academnic Press, l977. 
E.E. Van Tamlen (Ed.), Bioorganic Chemistry, Vol. I-IV, Academic Press, l978. 
Selected reading from `Science", `Scientific American" and `Accounts of Chemical Research. 
;;
CH 841;Introduction; primary and secondary metabolites precursors. 
Methods used in study of bio-synthesis. Biosynthesis and metabolism. 

Biosynthesis of photosynthetic apparatuses. Acetogenins, acetate hypothesis, biosynthesis of saturated and unsaturated fatty acids, polyacetylenes and aromatic polyketides. Isoprenoids-biosynthesis of mevolanate, mono-, sesqui-, di-, and triterpenes. Modifying reactions. Biosynthesis of triterpenoids steroids and carotenoies. 

Shikimic metabolites (phenyl propanoids) simple cinnamic acid derivatives, flavonoids, coumarins, retenoid, tropolones, lignins etc. 

Alkaloids other amino acid derivatives. Alkaloids based on aliphatic amino acids, aromatic amino acids and other amino acids derivatives and peptides. Biosynthesis of polyproteins. 

Methods-precursor-incorporation experiments in fungi, biosynthesis in cell-free systems and biosynthesis in mutant organism. 

;;R.B. Herbert, Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites, Chapmann and Hall, l98l. 
P.Mannitto, Biosynthesis of Natural Products, Halstad Press, l98l. 
S. Natori, N. Ikekawa and M. Susuki, Eds. Advances in Natural Products Chemistry, Kodansha/Wiley, l98l. 
;;
CH 842;Second quantisation; many-particle systems; field; degenerate electron gas; Bogoliubov transformation. Variational principles applied to many-body systems; time-independent and time-dependent. 
Schrodinger, interaction and Heisenberg; pictures adiabatic `switching on". Gellmann Low theorem; Green functions; Lehmann representation; physical interpretation of Green functions; one and two-particle propagators; Hartree-Fock approximation. Reduced density matrices. Diagrammatic perturbation theory. Dyson equations. 

Goldstone theorem,theory of linear response. Collective modes. 

Randon phase approximation Molecular collision theory. 

;;G. Baym, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, W.A. Benjamin, l969. A.L. Fetter and J.D. Walecka, Quantum Theory of Many-Particle Systems. McGraw Hill, l97l. 
J. Linderberg and Y. Ohrn, Propagators in Quantum Chemistry, Academic Press, l973. E.R. Davidson, Reduced Density Matrices in Quantum Chemistry, Academic Press, l976. L.P.Kadanoff and G. Baym, Quantum Statistical Mechanics, W.A. Benjamin, l976. M.S. Child, Molecular Collision Theory, Academic Press, l974. 

;;
CH 846;Klein-Gorden equation, charge conjugation, nonrelativistic limit. 
Dirac equation, relativistic invariance and the Lorentz groups, free particle solutions, hydrogen atom, charge conjugation and the Dirac-hole theory. Nonrelativistic limit and Foldy-Wouthuy-sen transformation. The Breit interaction. 

Atomic numerical solutions, atomic hyperfine structures, atomic analytic solutions, one center expansions. Molecular Dirac-Fock analysis. Symmetry of molecular spinors. Relativistic effective potentials. Relativistic density functional treatment. 

Lodwin contractions and nonrelativistic approximations to the Dirac equation. Relativistic vital theorem. Variational stability. Improved Dirac-Fock theory. Fluid-dynamical representations and fluid-dynamical interpretations of the Dirac theory. 

;;G. Baym, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, W.A. Benjamin, Inc, New York, l973. 
H.A. Betne and E.E. Salpeter, Quantum Mechanics of one- and two-electron Atoms, Springer Verlag, Berlin, l957. 
A. Messiah, Quantum Mechanics, Vol. II, North Holland, Amsterdam, l962. 
Selected papers from the Proceedings of Royal Society, London, Accounts of Chemical Research, Physical Review, Journal of Chemical Physics, Chemical Physics Letters, Foundations of Physics and Journal of Mathematical Physics. 
;;
CH 864;Amino acids, chemical nature of polypeptides, amino acid analysis. 
Protein sequences and evolution. Conformational characteristics of polypeptides. Conformational predictions. Proteins in solution. 

Interactions with other molecules. 

Nucleosides and nucleotides. Coenzymes. Physical characteristics. 

Conformational features. Hydrogen bonding and base stacking. The double helix. DNA polymorphism. RNA-structure. RNA- protein interaction. Higher organization of DNA. Brief survey of Relication, Transcription and translation. 

Protein biosynthesis. Covalent modification and topogenesis. 

Site-directed mutagenesis. Perspectives of chemical synthesis. 

Functional group protection-deprotection. Condensing reagents. 

Solution vs solid phase synthesis. 

;;T.E. Creihton, Proteins: Structure and molecular properties, W.H. Freeman and Co., 1984. 
W. Saenger, Principles of nucleic acid structure, Springer, 1984. 
M. Bodanszky, Peptide Chemistry, Springer, 1988. 
;;
HS 104;Definition of psychology, work of psychologist,modern perspectives of psychology,methods of psychology. Learning and memory. 
Motivation,frustration and conflict. 

Intelligence. 

Social Behavior. 

Distinction between sociological and psychological approaches. 

The nature of human society. Some sociological concepts: status and role, norms and values. 

Socialization. Primary and secondary groups,social stratification,social control and system of regulation. 

Population and Society. 

Major Institutions. Processes of Social change. 

;;C.T.Morgan,R.A.King,J.A. Welsz and J. Schopler, Introduction to Psychology, 7th Edition,McGraw Hill, 1986. 
G.A.Kimble, N.Garmezy, E.Zigler, Principles of Psychology,6th Edition, Wiley Eastern, 1985. 
T.B.Bottomore,Sociology,George Unwin, 1975. 
M.Harlambos and R.Heald,Sociology:Themes and Perspectives, Oxford University Press, 1980. 
L.Broom,P.Selznick and D.Darrock, Sociology, Harper International Edition, 7th Edition,1981. 
;;
HS 107;Humanities represents the unity of the various ways through which we come to understand the human condition. Through philosophical and literary discussion, the following issues will be raised: (i) the understanding of nature: a critical examination of the basic concepts, assumptions and methods used in the understanding of nature and the mode of understanding itself; (ii) problems arising out of the understanding and controlling of nature-the current crises created by technology and the political and social changes as they impinge on human dignity, human rights and personal identity. Literary forms listed below will be studied: (a) poetry,(b) drama,(c) short stories/novels. Excerpts from Jacob Bronowsk"s The Ascent of Man may be used. ;;Emest Nagel, The Structure of Science: Problems in the Logic of Scientific Explanation,Rout ledge, 1961. 
C.B.Hempel,Philosophy of Natural Science, Prentice-Hall,1966. 
Carl Mitcham and Mack Roberts (eds.),Philosophy and Technology,The Free Press,1972. 
Hart Allen,Ogburn Miller and Ninkoff,Technology and Social Change, Appleton-Century-Crofts,1957. 
R.P.Hewett (ed.),A Choice of Poets: an anthology of poets from Wordsworth to the present day, George B.Harry and Co. Ltd.,1970. 
Bertolt Brecht, The Life of Galileo, Translated by Desmond Vessey, Oxford University Press,1960. 
;;
HS 201;Intorduction, basic problems,price functioning in a mixed economy. The bare elements of supply and demand,output and price as determined by supply and demand. The Theory of demand and utility,Analysis of costs,competitive supply,imperfect competition. 
Overview of macro economics,measuring national output,consumption and investment, The Theory of output determination, Fiscal policy in theory and practice, inflation,money and commercial banking (Principles only). 

;;P.A.Samuelson, and W.D.Nordhaus,Economics, McGraw-Hill,1985. References 
R.G.Lipsey, An Introduction to positive Economics, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1970. 
Stonier and Hague,A Test-book of Economic Theory, Orient Longmans (ELBS), 1980. 
A.Koutsoyiannis, Modern Microeconomics, Macmillan,1975. 
Joan Robinson, Intorduction to Modern Economics, Tata McGraw-Hill,1973.;;
HS 601;History of Idea of development - Issues and alternative strategies in development- Man in capitalist society other than capitalist diagnoses and answers - Beyond the State and Market- Man"s needs - Roads to sanity, survival and sustainable development. Perceptions of Indian thinkers on developemt and planning such as Dadabhai Naoroji, B.G. Tilak, M.G. Ranade, R.C.Dutta, M.N. Roy, P.C. Ray, D.D. Kosambi, M. Bhabha, V. Sarabhai, P.C. Mahalnobis, M.K. Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru, J.R.D. Tata etc. 
Meaning, nature and the scope of planning-concepts and techniques and strategies of planning- Input-Output Models and Linear Programming Technique- Planning in India-Evaluatation of Indian Plan models and performance of planning in India. Planning versus privatisation- Experiences of the erstwhile Centrally Planned Economies. Perspectives on Socio-economic policies in India-Population policies - mobilisation of resources- Monetary and fiscal policies-Rural development and Agricultural policies-policies for the upliftment of weaker sections-industrial policies-foreign trade and exchange rate policies, etc. 

;;Eric Fromm, The Sane Society, Fawcet, Premier, New York, 1955. 
Bhabhatosh Datta, Indian Economic Thought, 1900-1950, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1978. 
J.P. Sharma (ed. Individuals and Ideas in Modern India, FIRMA,KLM, Calcutta, 1982. 
Bhiku Parekh, Colonialism, Tradition and Reform, Sage, New Delhi, 1989. 
R.E.B. Lucas and G.F. Papanek (eds.), The Indian Economy :Recent Developments and Future Prospects, Oxford Univesity Press, New Delhi, 1988. 
Ashok Rudra, Indian Plan Models, Allied Publishers, 1975. 
S. Chakravarty: Development Planning: The Indian Experience, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1987. 
R.M. Sundarum, Growth and Income Distribution in India: Policy and Performance since Independence, S;;
ME 309;Closed loop control and open loop control, building blocks and transfer functions, Laplace transformation, mathematical model of physical systems. Proportional integral and PID controllers. 

Transient response analysis of zeroth, first and second order systems. Stability analysis in feed back controls. Root - locus and frequency-response methods. Improving system performance. 

Introduction to non-linear control systems. Discrete-time systems and Z-transform methods. Microprocessor based digital control, state space analysis, optional and adaptive control systems. 

;MATHS  III;F.H. Raven, Automatic Control Engineering, 3rd Ed, McGraw Hill, 1978. 
K. Ogate, Modern Control Engineering, Prentice Hall of India, Eastern Economy Edition 1982. 
;;
HS 602;Growth of S & T and their relationship to economy and social relations in the ancient and medieval India- Introduction of modern S & T in India in the colonial era - Development of S & T and their relationship to socio-economic systems in the post-independence period; alternative models -Emergence of big science and technology and their role in economic growth through industrialization. 
The current adoption of high technology, which is largely imported, in not only raising productivity levels and rates of growth in different sectors, but also in shaping the structure of the economy and social relations-Technology transfer from foreign firms and plight of indigenous technology competing with imported technology-Technology absorption and assimilation by Indian firms - The emergence of dual society. 

Debates on technology choice - Issues of high vrs. appropriate technology - technology for basic needs, for the conquest of hunger and unemployment, to overcome resources constraints, for raising productivity, for conservation of energy and environment, for people centred developement, and for sel-freliance, Monistic Vrs. Pluralistic views of S & T and newly emerging alternative views of S & T and corresponding models of development. 

Case studies of technologies to solve specific developmental problems. 

;;A. Rahman, Science and Technology in India, NISTADS, 1984. 
A.V. Desai (ed.), Technology Absorption and Development in Indian Industry, Wiley Eastern, 1989. 
Bipin Behari, Unemployment, Technology and Rural Poverty, Vikas, 1983. 
D.P. Chattopadhyay, History of Science and Technology in Ancient India, Firma KIM,1986. 
V.T. Raju, Impact of New Agricultural Technology of Firm Income Distribution and Employment, National publishing House, 1988. 
Ashis Nandy (ed)., Tradition, Tyranny and Utopias, Oxford Universit;;
HS 603;Defining Social Change: Patterns of change, factors and conditions of change, direction of change, control of change, planned change. 
Relevant concepts:Progress, Urbanization,industrialization, modernization, Developemnt, Revolution and Social movements as forms of change. 

Theories of change: Modernization theory and conflict theory. India"s response to modernity: Relations between tradition and modernity (antagonistic or continuity and persistence, modernization of tradition and traditionalization of modernity.) Theories of under-development/dependency, Relations between planning and development, social factors of economic planning and development. 

Culture of development: Role of culture in social developemnt values and development congruence, Indian values and behaviour dispositions in the context of National development, Reorganizing values for development,Designing organizational culture and behaviour tools for development. 

Psychology of developing societies: Psychology of poverty and deprivation, perspectives on organizational alleviation of poverty and deprivation, psychology of rural poor. 

Role of strategic organizations (including bureaucracy) in planning and development, Re-vitalization of sick strategic organizations. 

;;Alvin So, Social Change & Development, SAGE, 1992. 
S.N. Eisentadt, Tradition Change and Modernity, John Wiley and Sons, 1973. 
Yogendra Singh, Modernization of Indian Tradition, Rawat Publications, 1988. 
Durganand Sinha and Rao,, H.S.R. (ed), Social Values and Development: Asian Perspectives, Sage Publications, 1988. 
Khandwalla, P.N.(ed), Social Development: A New Role for Organizational Sciences, Sage publications, 1988. 
D.N. Goyal (ed), The Sociology of Economic Development - A reader, Harper and Row, 197;;
HS 604;Meaning and nature of microlevel planning- conceptual aspects-Appropriate Unit for Micro level planning: Theoretical and Methodological issues: criteria for demarcation-Techniques for regional analysis. 
Decentralization and development in India: Socio Political framework-Problems in regional imbalances: Trends in regional development planning: Linkages between rural and urban issues-Problems in implementation-Case studies for regional analysis- Emerging pattern for micro level planning. 
;;C.T. Kurien, Poverty, Planning and Social Transformation (Allied), 1978. 
Bettleheim, Charles: Studies in the Theory of Planning (Asia), 1959. 
Jan Tinbergen; Essays in Regional World Planning (NCAER) 1966. 
N. Isard, Methods of Regional Analysis, John Wiley, 1960. 
R.P. Misra (Ed.) Micro level Planning: Principles, Methods and Case Studies (Concept, New Delhi) 1988. 
UN Asian and Pacific Development Institite: Local Level Planning and Rural Development, Alternative Strategies (Concept, New Delhi), 1986. 
O.P. Mahajan, Economic Planning and Regional Development in India (ESS publications), 1982. 
;;
HS 605;The Scientifice approach, Problem formulation, hypothesis building, variable identification. 
Field Research Methods, the Case Method, The Empirical Method. Data Base, Scaling Techniques, Questionnaires, Interviews, Observational and Archival data. 

Writing a Research Report. 

Computer use in social sciences, Algorithms and flowcharts, basic statements or commands in programmes, concepts of arrays and matrices, files and file organisation. 

Preparation of data for analysis, coding and transformation, descriptive statistics, Nonparametric tests, Elements of multivariate analysis. 

;;George S. Howard, Basic Research Methods in Social Sciences, Scott Foresman and Company, 1985. 
Louis H. Kidder and Charles M. Judd, Research Methods in Social Relations, CBS college Publishing, 1986. 
C.R. Kothari, Research Methodology: Methods and Techniques, Wiley Eastern, New Delhi, 1985. 
B.J. Winer, Statistical Principles in Experimental Designs, 2nd edition, New York, McGraw-Hill 1971. 
C.T. Kurien (Ed), A Guide to Research in Economics, Sangam Publishers, Madras, 1973. 
Cochran, W.G. and Snedecor, G.W. Statistical Methods, Oxford and IBH publishing Company, 6th edition, 1967. 
Croxton, F.E. and Cowden, D.S., Applied General satistics, Prentice-Hall of India, Second Edition, 1966. 
SPSS/PC, Basic Manual, 1991. 
PC, Advanced Statistics Manual, 1991.;;
HS 606;History and Politics of Western Energy Crisis and Third World food shortage: Underlying values of environmentalism; environmental movement as a social issue (or public issues) in Developed Industrialised Nations and Developing Nations in general, and in India in Particular. 
Current pollution research in India: Influence of water and Air Pollution; Trnasport, Industry and Pollution; Municipal Solid Waste, Pollution and Waste disposal techniques; Noise pollution and Noise control etc. 

Specific Environmental processes at global, regional and local levels: Urbanization, population explosion and environmental degradation; Deforestation, Desertification and denudation of environment - the problems of extinction of animals and plant species; the issues of drinking water, housing. Urbanization and slums in Indian context. 

Economics and Environment: Economic approaches to Environmental problems-some theoretical and methodological issues of impact assessment; Techniques of Environmental analysis-Cost-Benefit Analysis, Linear Programming models and Project evaluation etc. for quality assessment; Identification and techniques of risk assessment. 

Management and Planning of Environment - A Projective Model; Role of State and pPlitics in environmental decision-making. Future of Environmental management: An integrative approach; Environmental Management as an applied science - Government policy on Environmental Protection. 

;;Hamza Alavi and Theodor Shanin (ed.), Introduction to the Sociology of "Developing Societies", The Macmillan Press Ltd., 1982 (Selectvie chapters) 
S.K. Agarwal and R.K. Garg (eds), Environmental issues and Researches in India, (Professor L.N. Vyas Commemoration Volume), Himanshu Publications, Udaipur, 1988. 
R.K. Sapru, Environment Management in India (Vols. I & II), Ashish Publis;;
HS 607;Human Resource Development: Concepts, Strategies, quantitative indicators, models and techniques-Integration of human resource and general development planning-problems and issues of manpower planning-Demographic considerations-Labour Force:Levels and trends in size and growth-length of working life and implications. Humn resources development through Indian planning:Past experience and future challenges-Ethnic issues, illiteracy, social and protective discrimination. Motivation, training and development, performance appraisal, and leadership issues. Organizational change and development strategies for macro level. ;;Fredrick Harbison and Charles A. Myers, Education, Manpower and Economic Growth: Strategies of human resource development, McGraw-Hill, 1964. U.N., The Determinants and Consequences of Population Trends, United Nations, 1973. Khandwalla, P.N. Social Development: Behavioural Perspective, Sage, New Delhi, 1989. Max Neef, Human Scale Development: Conception, Application, and Further Reflections, ZED Books, New Delhi, 1992. 
;;
ME 320;Elementary thermodynamic considerations, refrigeration cycles, refrigerants, components of vapour compression system, low temperature vapour compression refrigeration systems, gas cycle refrigeration. Vapour absorption system, miscellaneous refrigeration processes, applications. Air conditioning principles, psychrometrics, thermodynamic relations for the properties of moist air, concept of thermal comfort, evaporative cooling, basics of load estimation and space air distribution. Solar heating and cooling systems. Energy conservation. 

;ME 209, ME 210;J.L. Threlkeld, Thermal Environmental Engineering, Prentice Hall, 1970. 
Handbook of Air conditioning Systems Design, Carrier Airconditioning Co.,1970. 
;;
HS 608;The concept of and need for public participation in development-Grass-root democracy-origin, evolution and working of community Development and Extension Programmes-Panchayat Raj Structure, organisation, functions and resources - Reports of various committees on Panchayat Raj in India-Impact, achievements and difficulties in Panchayat Raj-Case studies of Panchayat Raj in West Bengal, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, and other states. ;;Government of India, Planning Commission, Report of the Team for the Study of Community projects and National Extension Service (Balwantrai Mehta Committee Report), New Delhi. 1957. 
GOI, Ministry of Agriculture, Report of the Committee on Panchayat Raj Institutions (Ashok Mehta Committee Report) New Delhi, 1978. 
Maddick, Henry, Panchayat Raj A study of Rural Local Government in India, Longman, London, 1970 
Ram Reddy, G., Patterns of Panchayat Raj, Macmillan, New Delhi, 1977. 
Jain, L.C. and others, Grass without Roots, Sage New Delhi, 1985. 
Jain, S.C., Community Development and Panchayat Raj in India, Allied, New Delhi, 1976. 
George, Mathew, Panchayat Raj in Karnataka, New Delhi, 1986. 
Report of the Committee to Review the Existing Administrative Arrangements for Rural Development and Poverty Alleviation Programmes (CAARD), 1985. 
;;
HS 609;Nature and scope of Development Administration public Bureauracy, Politics, planners and people in Development Administration; Development Administration in India since Independence: Administrative Reforms. 
Areas of Development Administration: Regional Planning and Developmental Administration: Urban and Rural Development Programs role of local bodies, including voluntary organisations. Structure of leadership and Development Adminstration in Regional Development. 

Plannig, Evaluation and Organisation for Developmental Admisnstration: Project Appraisals; Techniques of evaluation; Financial and organisation problems-Role of Banks and Co-operatives. 

Attitude and Motivational aspects of Bureaucrats, Planners, Politicians:Leadership Training; Training in Development dministration; Management and Training for entrepreneural Development. 

;;B.C. Mathur, K. Diesh, C. Chnadrasekharan, Management in Governmnet, Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, 1981. 
Pai Panandikar et.al. (ed), Bureaucracy and Development Adminstration, Centre for Policy Reserach, New Delhi, 1978. 
B.B. Mishra, Government and Bureaucracy in India 1947-1978, OUP, 1986. 
S.C. Dube, Modernisation and Development, Sage, New Delhi, 1991. 
A.F. Robertson, People and the State:.An Anthropology of Planned Development, Cambridge University Press, 1984. 
Pai Panandikar, V.A. (ed), Development Adminstration in India, The Macmillan Co. of India Ltd., 1974. 
D.B. Gupta, Y.C. Halen and P.B. Desai (ed), Development Planning and Policy: Essays in honour of Prif. V.K.R.V. Rao, Wiley Eastern Ltd., 1982. 
;;
ME 325;Mechanisms: Lower and higher pairs, degrees of freedom, various types of mechanisms, their inversions and applications, universal joints, introduction to spatial linkages. 
Kinematic Analysis: Determination of velocities and accelerations using graphical and analytical techniques, instant centres, Coriolis component of acceleration. Cams : Cam follower systems, determination of cam profiles, pressure angles, equivalent mechanisms, curvature. 

Gears : Types of gearing and gear trains. laws of gearing contact ratio, gear corrections. 

Kinematic Synthesis : Analytical procedures for synthesis of four line mechanisms, spatial linkages. 

;;J.E. Shigley and J.J. Uieker, Theory of Machines and Mechanisms, McGraw Hill, 1980. 
B. Paul, Kinematics and Dynamics of Planar Mechanisms, Prentice Hall, 1979. 
;;
HS 610;The welfare and Philosophical foundations of cost-benefit analysis-efficiency and distribution-Decision rules in appraising cost and benefits of long-term projects - the social rate of discount, social time preference rate, the oppertunity cost-the valuation of cost and benefits, surrogate prices-Risks and uncertainity-Cost-benefit analysis as a technique of project appraisal-Some case studies. ;;E.J. Mishan, Cost-Benefit Analysis, Allen and Unwin, 1973. 
I.M.D. Little and J. Mirrlees, Manual of Industrial Project Analysis in Developing Countries, Vol.II, O.E.C.D., Paris , 1969 
A.K. Dasgupta and C.W. Pearce, Cost-Benefit Analysis : Theory and Practice, Macmillan, London, 1972. 
;;
HS 611;Importance and role of finance in economic development- structure, growth and innovations in Indian financial system- Sources and uses of funds-Changes in the rate and composition of savings and capital formation-The role of commercial banks and development banks in financing private and public sectors-Capital and money markets and changes in these markets- Institutional financing of economic development- The role, limitations and problems of internal and external debt of Govt. and dangers of deficit, financing- Bilateral and multilateral foreign aid-Private Foreign investment-Role of Wrld Bank, IMF, and international capital markets in financing development. ;;R.E.B. Lucas and G.F. Papanek (eds), The Indian Economy: Recent Development and Future Prospects (OUP), 1988. 
Bauer, P.T., Dissent on Development, Vikas Publishing House, Delhi, 1973. 
International Economic Association, Financing Problems of Development Countries, A Gutowski, A.A., Arnando and H.E. Scharrer (eds) Macmillan Press Ltd., London 1985. 
Newlyn, W.T., The Financing of Economic Development, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1977. 
Richard, Goode, Government Finance in Developing Countries, Tata McGraw Hill Co., New Delhi, 1984. 
;;
HS 612;Forecasting to support technological strategic and operational planning-Elements and techniques of forecasting-Technical assessment-Technological gap analysis-Organizing for technology forecasting- Technology in Social context- Assessment: Components, Problmes definition, description, strategies, Impact identification and analysis-Economic impact analysis-Assessment of risk and uncertainty-safety and environment regulations-Critiques. ;;J. Fowles, Handbook of Future Research, Greenwood Pess, 1978. 
H. Jones and B.C. Twiss, Forecasting Technology for Panning decisions, Macmillan, 1978. 
J.P. Mrinto, Technological Forecasting for Decision making, North-Holland, 2nd Edition, 1973. 
A.L.Porter, et.al., A Guidebook for Technology Assessment and Analysis, Series Vol. 4, North Holland, 1980. 
;;
ME 326;Mechanical Vibration: Single degree of freedom (SDF) free vibration, SDF forced vibration, vibration isolation, base excitation, vibration instruments, two degrees of freedom system, dynamic vibration absorber, geared System, multidegree of freedom system. Transverse vibrations and torsional vibrations of two and three rotor systems. 
Critical speeds. 

Static Forces: Free body diagrams, condition of equilibrium , gear force analysis, static force analysis. 

Dynamic Forces: Dynamic analysis, inertia forces, crankshaft torques, shaking force. 

Cam Dynamics: Analysis of a disc cam with reciprocating roller follower, analysis of elastic cam systems, jump phenomenon, Machine Dynamics: Fly wheels, gyroscopes. Balancing: Static balance, dynamic balance, balancing of single cylinder engines, balancing of multicylinder engines, balancing of linkage. 

;;Mechanical Vibration: Single degree of freedom (SDF) free vibration, SDF forced vibration, vibration isolation, base excitation, vibration instruments, two degrees of freedom system, dynamic vibration absorber, geared System, multidegree of freedom system. Transverse vibrations and torsional vibrations of two and three rotor systems. 
Critical speeds. 

Static Forces: Free body diagrams, condition of equilibrium , gear force analysis, static force analysis. 

Dynamic Forces: Dynamic analysis, inertia forces, crankshaft torques, shaking force. 

Cam Dynamics: Analysis of a disc cam with reciprocating roller follower, analysis of elastic cam systems, jump phenomenon, Machine Dynamics: Fly wheels, gyroscopes. Balancing: Static balance, dynamic balance, balancing of single cylinder engines, balancing of multicylinder engines, balancing of linkage. 

;;
MM 327;Introduction. Metal forming processes: Rolling-Simple analysis, process capabilities applications. Forging - basic operations, process capabilities. Extrusion and wire Drawing- basic operations, process capabilities and applications. Sheet Metal Working-basic operations, process capabilities, process planning, elements of tooling. Other metal forming processes, e.g. 
explosive, spinning, swaging. Physicomechanical aspects of metal forming defects and quality control. 

Casting - Classification of processes. patterns - types, materials, design Considerations. Sand Moulds - Foundry sands their properties and testing. Shell moulding Investment casting, CO2 moulds. Pressure die casting, permanent moulds, Centrifugal casting. Solidification of casting and flow properties of liquid metals. Design principles of gating and rising systems. Use of chills, exothermic and insulating sleeves applications. Melting of ferrous and nonferrous metals. 

Causes and remedies of casting defects. Joining : Classification, brazing, soldering, adhesive bonding and diffusion bonding, thermo-chemical processes , solid state welding methods, resistance welding processes. Arc Welding Processes: Power source, arc characteristics and control, manual metal arc welding, submerged arc welding, inert gas shielded arc welding. Other arc welding, Electroslag welding processes. Weldability tests, welding of steels, aluminimum alloys and reactive metals. Causes of welding defects inspection. Plastics : Difference between properties of plastics and metals and processing methods for plastics. Advantages and limitations of plastics with examples from applications. Powder Metallurgy : Basic principles, process parameters, advantages and limitations. 

;;James S. Campbell, Principles of Manufacturing and Processes, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1978. 
;;
HS 614;Work: gender division of labour, women in agriculture, home-based workers, export-oriented industries especially textile and electronics industry, third world women workers especially domestic and nurses in developed countries, the impact of technology on women"s work. 

Health Issues : Rethinking maternity and maternal health care; the impact of contraceptive and reproductive technologies; the impact of population policies; sex tourism, sexually transmitted disease and AIDS.

Environment and Human Rights : Deforestation and quality of women"s lives, women in the Chippko movement; the concept of ecofeminism; rights for women, justice in the courts. 

Empowering Women Literacy, education and training programs; women"s employment; political participation and governance. 

Feminist Research Methods : What is feminist research? Is there a feminist methodology? Feminist oral history, action and policy-oriented research. Assessment of Development programs and projects from a feminist perspective.
;NIL;Momsen, J. & Kinnaird, V.: `Different Places, Different Voices: Gender and Development in Africa, Asia and Latin America" Routledge: Landon, 1993 
Momsen, J. :`Women and Development in the Third World", Routledge: London, 1991. 
Ostergaard, L.: `Gender and Development" Routledge: London, 1992. 
Rose, K. :`Where women are Leaders : The SEWA Movement in India " Zed : London, 1992. 
Mies, M.: "Housewives Produce for the World Market" The Lacemakers of Narsapur" ILO Geneva, 1980. 
Jose, A.V. : `Limited Options: Women Workers in Rural India. "ILO Geneva (Ed.),1989. 
Gulati, L. :`Profiles in Female Poverty", Hindustan Publ. Corp., N. Delhi, 1981.;;
HS 616;LANGUAGE, SOCIETY AND CULTURE: Language and identity; concepts of iodlect, dialect and language; the Universalist-Relativist debate; LANGUAGE AND COMMUNICATION : Communicative competence; types of communicative domains and linguistic repertoire; LANGUAGE AND DEVELOPMENT: Relationship between socio-ecomomic development and linguistic development; language acquisition and the socialization; processes of pidginization and creolization; LANGUAGE AND PLANNING: National integration and cultural plurilism; bi-lingualism and multilingualism; language in education; standardization, modernization and language planning. ;;Annamalai, E. Jermudd, BH abnd Rubin J. Language Planning, Central Institute of Indian Languages, Mysore and Institute of Culture and Communication, Howaii, 1986. 
Fishman, J.A., Ferguson C. and Das Gupta J. (eds) Language Problems of Developing Nations, Wiley, New York, 1968. 
Kennedy Chris (ed.), Language Planning and Language Education, George Allen and Unwin, London, 1983. 
Pandit P.B., India as a Sociolinguistic Arena, Poona University, Poona, 1972. 
Williams G., Sociolinguistics: A Sociological Critique, Routledge, London, 1992. ;;
HS 800; The nature and process of research, selection and formulation of a research problem. Research design: explanatory and descriptive studies, testing of hypothesis. Problems of measurement. Data collection: observational methods, questionnaires and interviews, projective and other indirect methods. Use of available data as source material. Scaling techniques. Sampling. Analysis and interpretation; establishment of categories, coding, tabulation, statistical analysis. The use of non-quantified data in analysis and interpretation. The research report. Application of social sciences, research and theory. Values and Objectivity in Social Science Research. ;;Pauline V. Young, Scientific Social Surveys and Research, 4th edition, Prentice Hall, Ind., 1966. 
Goode and Hatt, Method in Social Research, International Student Edition, McGraw-Hill, 1952. 
Moser & Kalson, Survey Methods in Social Investigation, Heinemann Educational Book Ltd. London, 1971. 
Clair Seltiz, M. Jahoda, Morton Deutch, Stuart W. Cook, Research Methods in Social Relations, Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1964 revised edition. 
Cohen and Nagel, Introduction to Logic and Scientific Method, Harcourt, Brace, New York, 1934. 
Lazarsfeld and Rosenberg, Language of Social Research, Free Press, N.Y., 1955. ;;
HS 801; Inferential statistics. Tests of mean differences: +, F, Neuman Keul, Duncan, Suffay, Turkey tests. Simple, multiple, partial, and canonial correlation. Simple and multiple regression. ANOVA and MANOVA. Discriminant, Factor, and Cluster Analyses. Brief introduction of Trend and Path Analysis. Non parametric tests. Chi square, Mann whitney U test, Run test, sign test etc. ;;Hays, W.L. (1988). Statistics. Chicago: Holf Rinshart and Winston, Inc. 
Morrison, D.F. (1990). Multivariate Statistical Methods. Sydney: McGraw-Hill. 
Seigal, S. (1987). Non-parametric Statistics. McGraw-Hill. 
Van Da Geer, J.P. (1993). Multivariate Analysis of Categorical data theory (Vol.2&3). New Delhi: Sage. 
Winer, B.J. (1971). Statistical Principles in Experimental Design (International Students Edition). New Delhi: McGraw-Hill. ;;
HS 802; Economic growth: Theories and models. The technology of the economy. 
The neoclassical one sector model of growth. Two sector models of economic growth and planning. 
;;P.A. Samuelson, John R. Colemar & R.C. Bishop, Readings in Economics, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1973. 
A.K. Sen (Ed.) Growth Economics, Penguin, 1970. 
H.Y. Wan, Economic Growth, Harcourt, 1971. 
American Economic Association/Royal Economic Society: Surveys in Economic Theory Vol.II. Growth & Development; Macmillan, 1967. 
F.H. Hahn, Readings in the Theory of Growth, Macmillan, 1971. 
A.V. Bhuleshkor, Indian Economic Thought and Development, 1969. 
;;
HS 803; Crisis and Recent debates on different issues in Psychology. Theories and Research in Feminist Psychology and Gender Studies. Organizational Behaviour: Present status. Research on Training and development. 
Cognitive Psychology: Research on intelligence and cognitive development. Applied Social Psychology. Methodological issues in psychological research. Environmental and Community Psychology.
;;Porter, L.W., & Rosenzweig, M.R. (1994). Annual Review of Psychology. (1991, 1993). California: Annual Reviews Inc. 
Stokols, D., & Altma, I. (1991). Handbook of Environmental Psychology (Vol. 1,2). Florida: Krieger. 
Williams, J. (1985). Psychology of Women (Ed.), New York: Norton. 
;;
HS 804; Scope and problems of sociological analysis; sociological theory and empirical research. History of developments in sociological theory with special emphasis on the contributions of Comte, Marx, V. Pareto, George Simmel, F. Tonnies, Max Weber and Durkheim; Major schools of sociological theory; Positivistic organism; Conflict theory; Social action theory; Social system; Middle range theories of social processes, social structure, social stratification, social change, ethnic group, reference group behaviour. 
;;John Rex, Key Problems of Sociological Theory, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1961. 
Jon Martindale, The Nature and Types of Sociological Theory, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1961. 
F. Tonnies, Community and Association: Gemeinschaft and Gessellschaft, Translated and Supplemented by Charles P. Loomis, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1955. 
R.K. Merton, Social Theory and Social Structure, Indian Edition, Original, 1968. 
T. Parsons, Shils, et.al. Theories of Society, Vol.I & II. The Free Press, Glencoe, 1961. 
;;
HS 805; Some Methodological Questions.

(a) Analysis and Philosophy

(b) Philosophy and Argument

Scepticism and Rational Justification for Knowledge; A Historical
Perspective.

(a) Academic vs. Pyrrhonian Scepticism

(b) Contemporary Philosophy

Scepticism about Senses/Objects and the Problem of Perception.

(a) The Problem

(b) The Argument from Illusion

(c) Status of sense-data and the dichotomy between "ideas" and
"objects", "sense-data" and "material thing", "the given" and "the
constructed or inferred," "experience" and its object.

(d) Hierarchical Structure of Knowledge;  sense - data language as the
foundation Reductionism.

(e) Causal Theory of Perception

(f) Phenomenalism

(g) Recent Observations

(h) Work on Perception from interdisciplinary point of view.

Scepticism about the past: The problem of Memory.  Scepticism about the
future: The problem of Induction.

(a) Scepticism and grounds of induction

(b) Probability.

Scepticism about the Self: The problem of Personal Identity.

Scepticism about the selves: The problem of other minds.

Knowledge and Belief.  The Object of Knowledge.

The sources of Knowledge and the nature of proposition.

;;Swartz, Robert, J. (Ed.), Perceiving, Sensing & Knowing, Anchor Books, Doubleday & Co., 1965. 
A.J. Ayer, The Argument from Illusion in Foundations of Empirical Knowledge, Macmillan Students" Edition, 1969. 
A.J. Ayer, Perception in the Problem of Knowledge, Pelican Book, 1968. 
J.F. Soltis, Seeing, Knowing and Believ;;
HS 806; The concept of language in the philosophy of Wittgenstein. Meaning and Use. Symptom and Criteria. The Speech Act analysis of language: views of Austin and Searle. Names and Natural kind terms; view of Quine, Ryle, Strawson, Donnellan, Putnam and Kripke. 
Ethics and Language: Moore: Natural and Non-natural Properties; "Good" as a simple notion. Stevenson: Disagreement in belief and in Attitude; Persuasive Argument. Universalizability, Moral Argument, Reason in Ethics: Views of Hare and Toulmin. 
;;A.P. Martinich (ed.), The Philosophy of Language, OUP, 1985. 
J.L. Austin, How To Do Things with Words, OUP, 1975. 
J.R. Searle, Speech Acts, Cambridge University Press, 1969. 
L. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, Basil Blackwell, 1963. 
C.L. Stevenson, Ethics and Language, Yale University Press, 1944. 
R.M. Hare, The Language of Morals, Clarendon Press, 1952. 
S.E. Toulmin, An Examination of the Place of Reason in Ethics, Cambridge University Press, 1970. 
S.P. Schwartz (ed.), Naming, Necessity and Natural Kinds, Cornell University Press, 1977. 
;;
HS 809; Types of Literary Research: Theoretical Research, Textual Research, Historical Research, Interpretative Research, Interdisciplinary Research. 
Methods of Literary Research: Presentation, References, Footnotes, Indexing, Bibliography.
;;R. Altick, The Art of Literary Research, Norton & Co., N.Y., 1963. 
C. Saunders, An Introduction to Research in English Literary History, Macmillan, N.Y., 1957. 
G. Watson, (Ed.), The Concise Cambridge Bibliography of English Literature, CUP, Cambridge, 1965. 
F.W. Bateson, The Scholar-Critic: An Introduction to Literary Research, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1972. 
J. Anderson, B.H. Durston, and M. Poole, Thesis and Assignment Writing, Wiley Eastern Limited, New Delhi, 1970. 
J. Gibaldi, MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers, MLA, N.Y. 1995. 
E. Burns & T. Burns (Eds.), Sociology of Literature and Drama, Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1973. 
R. Schechner, Essays on Performance Theory: 1970-1976. Drama Book Specialists, N.Y., 1977. 
;;
HS 810;This course focuses on the twentieth century conceptual framework (issues and movements such as Darwinism, Freudianism, Marxism, Colonization, Imperialism, etc.) through the dramatic, poetic, and narrative forms of modern literature. Original literary creations will be used as illustrative texts from (a) Western literature, and (b) Post-colonial literatures. ;;Cox and Dyson (Eds.), The Twentieth-Century Mind, 3 Vols. OUP, London, 1972. 
F.R. Leavis, New Bearings in English Poetry, Chatto and Windus, London, 1971. 
Raymond Williams, Drama from Ibsen to Brecht, Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1973. 
Eric Bertley, (Ed.), The Theory of the Modern Stage, Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1968. 
John Halperin, (Ed.), The Theory of the Novel: New Essays, OUP, N.Y., 1974. 
Cleanth Brooks, Tradition and Modern Poetry, London, 1948. 
Bill Asheroft, G. Griffiths, H. Tiffins, The Empire Writes Back, Routledge, London, 1989. 
John Press, (Ed.), Commonwealth Literature, Heinemann, London, 1965. 
Augusto Boal, The Theatre of the Oppressed, Urizen Books, N.Y., 1979. ;;
HS 811;The course will focus on the following topics: The nature of literary evaluation and critical discussion. 
The place of universal criteria in literary criticism. 

Is literary experience autonomous? The relation between literary value and (a) social reality: the problem of Commitment, Black literature, Dalit literature, etc., (b) psychological reality, the problem of the unconscious (Freudian and Jungian). The theory of the forms/genres of literature. 

Structuralism and stylistics. 

;;R. Wellek, and A. Warren, Theory of Literature, Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1963. 
W. Wimsatt and C. Brooks, Literary Criticism: A Short History, OUP & IBH, New Delhi, 1957. 
T. Engleton, Literary Theory: An Introduction, Oxford, Blackwell, 1983. 
K. Elam, Semiotics of Theatre & Drama, Methuen, N.Y., 1980. 
T.S. Eliot, The Use of Poetry and the Use of Criticism, Faber, London, 1933. 
D. Lodge, (Ed.), Twentieth-Century Literary Criticism, Longman, London, 1972. 
D. Lodge (ed.), Modern Criticism & Theory. Longman, London, 1988. 
I.A. Richards, Principles of Literary Criticism, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1924. 
M.Rader, (Ed.), A Modern Book of Aesthetics, Fourth Edition, Holt, Reinhart & Winston, New York, 1973. 
D. Craig, (Ed.), Marxists on Literature, An Anthology, Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1975. 
N. Frye, Anatomy of Criticism, Princeton University Press, N.Y., 1957. 
;;
HS 820; The Methodological Foundations of Economic Analysis - Historicism, Positivism, Abstraction and Generalisation in Economic Science The purpose of and approach to Research. Formulation of Research problem and Research Design. Meaning of Hypothesis and Testing of hypotheses. Methodology of model building. Types of Economic models - Methods of data collection. Surveys and Sampling techniques. 
Structure of Dissertation. 

;;C.T. Kurien, (Ed.), A Guide to Research in Economics, Sangam Publishers, Madras, 1973. 
C.R. Kothari, Research Methodology: Methods and Techniques, Wiley Eastern, New Delhi, 1985. 
M. Blaug, The Methodology of Economics. 
H. Katouzian, Ideology and Method in Economics, Macmillan, 1980. ;;
ME 328;Theory of Metal Cutting : Mechanics of metal cutting, tool materials, geometry and chip formation, tool temperature, tool wear, tool life, surface finish and machinability. Optimization of machining process. 
Machine Tool: Generation principles, Machining principles, setting for typical products and operations, shaping, slotting and planing machines, lathe, drilling and boring machines, milling machine and grinding machines. 

Batch Production Machines : Capstan and turret lathes. Mass production machines and Processes : Single and multispindle automats, broaching machine, centreless grinding machines. Special purpose machines for thread cutting (thread milling) and gear cutting. Finishing Process: Microfinishing processes like honing, lapping (hobbing and shaping) and superfinishing. 

Introduction to modern machining processes, EDM, ECM, ultrasonic, LASER. Tooling : Jigs and fixtures, principles of location, clamping and grinding. Assembly : Principles of assembly engineering, theory of dimensional chains, fully interchargeable and selective assembly. 

;;P.C. Pandey and C.K.Singh, Production Engineering Sciences, Standard Publishers Limited, Delhi, 1980. 
G.Boothroyd, Fundamentals of Metal Cutting Machine Tools, Tata McGraw Hill, 1975. 
H.M.T. Publication, Production, Technology, Tata McGraw Hill, 1980. 
;;
HS 821; The aim of this one semester course is to give, briefly, an account of the main aspects of econometric procedures generally pursued by research analysts in economics. The course will attempt to enlighten the students for understanding the utility and disutility of various results based on econometric computations. No emphasis will be placed on derivation of formula and proofs. 
Simple, partial and multiple correlation analysis - simple and multiple regression. 

Normal distribution - small and large sample tests, F test. 

Hypothesis testing and prediction using multiple regression analysis - Econometric foundations. 

Functional forms and economic Interpretations, Time series, cross sectional and pooled analysis. 

Important problems in econometric model building and testing; use of estimated results in overcoming these problems. 
;;A.S. Goldberger, Topics in Regression Analysis, Macmillan, New York, 1968. 
P. Rao, and R.L. Miller, Applied Econometrics, Prentice-Hall of India Ltd. New Delhi, 1972. 
L.R. Klein, An Introduction to Econometrics, Prentice-Hall of India Ltd., New Delhi, 1969. 
Z. Griliches, and Interiligator, M.D. (Editors), Handbook of Econometrics, Vol.I, North Holland Pub. Co., New York, 1983. ;;
HS 823; Sets and relations. First order Language: Propositional calculus and quantifiers. Natural deduction and axiomatic approaches. Theory of conditionals. Modal Logic. Concept of truth and model. Semantics. 
Situation Logic. Relevance Logic. 

Formal analysis. The theory of description. Logical Atomism. 

Wittgenstein. Truth as meaning: Quine and Davidson. Possible world semantics: Kripke; D. Lewis and R. Stalnaker: Counterfactual conditionals and causation; Situation semantics: Barwise and Perry. 

;;E. Mendelson, Introduction to Mathematical Logic, 2nd edition, New York: D. van Nostrand Company, 1979. 
G.E. Hughes and M.J. Cresswell, An Introduction to Modal Logic, 2nd edition, Methuen, London, 1972. 
D. Davidson, Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation, Oxford Univ. Press, 1984. 
J.W. Addison, et.al.(eds.), The Theory of Models, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1965. 
D. Lewis, Counterfactuals, Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press, 1973. 
A.R. While, Modal Thinking, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1975. 
J. Barwise & J. Perry, Situations and Attitudes, Cambridge: M.I.T. Press, 1983. ;;
ME 329;Principles of experimental investigation, planning and designing of experiments, error estimation. Experiments in fluid machinery and strength of materials. 

;;;;
HS 828; For this course, a scholar may choose for study one of the following major philosophical thinkers or major philosophical viewpoints. In case the direction of the scholar"s research is such that the study of a philosophical thinker or viewpoint other than those listed here would enrich his research, he is permitted to take that for this course. 
Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz, Locke, Berkeley, Hume, Kant, Hegel Nietzsche, Karl Marx, Wittgenstein, G.E. Moore, Bertrand Russell, Gilbert Ryle, Austin, A.J. Ayer, P.F. Strawson, Brentano, Meinong, Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre, Albert Camus. 

Idealism, Realism, Materialism, Mechanism, Positivism, Rationalism, Indian Idealism, Pragmatism, Frankfurt School of Sociology, Existentialism.-

;;;;
ME 330;Moulding sands, core and core materials, moulding processes, production of metallic moulds and patterns. Melting equipments and melting technology. Moulding equipment, mechanization and automation applied to production techniques, factors influencing soundness of casting. Methoding, clearing, inspection of castings. Analysis of casting defects. 

;ME 327;R.W. Heine, C.R. Loper and P.C. Rosenthal, Principles of Metal Casting, Kogakusha McGraw Hill. 
;;
ME 332;Introduction - Hot and cold forming processes. Rolling - Classification of rolling mills, main units of a rolling mill, rolling mill layouts. Calculation of rolling force, rolling torque and power required. Roll design for blocking. slabbing and sheet rolling. Hot Forging - Hammer and press forgings, open and closed die forgings. 

Pneumatic hammers, hydraulic presses and mechanical presses for forging. 

Elements of design of closed-die forgings. Defects and inspection, cost estimation for forgings. Extrusion and Cold forging Application, type of metal flow in extrusion. 

Estimation of forces required, dies for extruded products. Recent developments in metal forming. 

;ME 327;G. Dieter, Mechanical Metallurgy, McGraw Hill, 1970. 
Kamenshchikov and others, Forging Practice, Peace Publishers, Moscow, 1962. 
A.I. Tschikov, Theory of Rolling, Peace Publishers, Moscow, 1978 
D. Eary, and E. Reed, Techniques of Press Working Prentice Hall, 1978. 
;;
ME 334;Experiments in Heat Transfer and Manufacturing Processes. 


;ME 210, ME 327;;;
ME 340;Problems in heat transfer, fluid mechanics, stress analysis, nuclear reactor theory, etc. formulated as ordinary differential equations and/or partial differential equations. Boundary value problems and eigenvalue problems. Properties of solutions. Methods of solution including integral transform and variational methods. Formulations leading to linear integral equations and linear algebraic equations. Matrix analysis. Some approximate methods of solution.;;(The list is only suggestive and not exhaustive) 
Partial Differential Equations and Boundary Value Problems with Applications by M A Pinsky McGraw Hill, 1991. 
Methods of Applied Mathematics by F.B.Hildebrand, Prentice - Hall, India, 1968. 
;;
ME 348;Introduction to digital computer and Fortran 77 Roots of algebraic and transcedental equations. Incremental search method, bisection method, Newton Raphson method Newton s second order method, roots of polynomial by Bairstow"s method solutions of simultaneous linear algebraic equations, Gauss Elimination method, Gauss - Seidel method, Cholesky s method, matrix inversion method, solutions of eigenvalue problems. 
Numerical integration and differentiation, integration by trapezoid rule. Romberg integration, integration by Simpson s rule, improper integrals. Numerical differentiation. Partial differential equations, elliptical, parabolic and hyperbolic partial differential equations. 

;;M.L. James, G. Smith, and J.C. Wolford, :Applied Numerical Methods for Digital Computations, 3rd Edition, Harper and Row Publishers, New York, 1985 
V. Rajaraman, Computer Oriented Numerical Methods, Prentice Hall of India Pvt.Ltd., New Delhi ,1974 
S.S. Sastry, Introductory Methods of Numerical Analysis, Prentice-Hall of India Pvt.Ltd., New Delhi,1981. 
;;
ME 354;Review of Newtonian mechanics, laws of motion, a general approach to treating problems in mechanics. Description of motion, coordinate systems, transformations, constraints, generalized coordinates, Lagrange s equations, moving reference frames, moving constraints, systems of particles, conservative and non-conservative systems. 
Dynamics of rigid bodies, moment of inertia, kinetic energy of a free rigid body, Euler angles and rigid body motion, Euler s equations, comparison of Euler s and Lagrange s treatments, interconnected systems of rigid bodies. Small oscillations about positions of equilibrium, normal coordinates, oscillations about steady motion, ignorable coordinates, stability of motion. 

;;H. Goldstein, Classical Mechanics, Addison - Wesley, Narosa ,1985 
D.T. Greenwood, Classical Dynamics, Prentice - Hall of India ,1985 
D.E. Wells, Lagrangian Dynamics, Schaum Publishing Co., 1967 
;;
MM 366;Basic equations in elasticity, state of strain, brittle coating method, crack patterns produced by direct loading, refrigeration method, releasing method, effect of coating thickness and environment. 
Photoelasticity methods, behaviour of light, plane polarised and circular polariscope, isochromatic and isoclinic fringe patterns for two dimensional photoelasticity, three dimensional photoelasticity, model slicing and shear difference method, birefringent coating method. 

Strain measurement methods, types of gauges, electric strain gauge, strain rosette analysis, three element, delta, four element rosette, strain gauge circuits and recording instrument. 

Moire fringe technique, surface strain measurements and flexural studies. Grid analysis. X-ray techniques and holography. Motion measurements. 

;;J.W. Dally and W.P. Riely, Experimental Stress Analysis , McGraw Hill Book Co., 1978. 
G.S. Holister, Experimental Stress Analysis, Cambridge University Press, 1967. 
R.C. Dove and P.H. Adams, Experimental Stress Analysis and Motion Measurements, Prentice Hall, 1965. 
;;
ME 366;Basic equations in elasticity, state of strain, brittle coating method, crack patterns produced by direct loading, refrigeration method, releasing method, effect of coating thickness and environment. 
Photoelasticity methods, behaviour of light, plane polarised and circular polariscope, isochromatic and isoclinic fringe patterns for two dimensional photoelasticity, three dimensional photoelasticity, model slicing and shear difference method, birefringent coating method. 

Strain measurement methods, types of gauges, electric strain gauge, strain rosette analysis, three element, delta, four element rosette, strain gauge circuits and recording instrument. 

Moire fringe technique, surface strain measurements and flexural studies. Grid analysis. X-ray techniques and holography. Motion measurements. 

;;J.W. Dally and W.P. Riely, Experimental Stress Analysis , McGraw Hill Book Co., 1978. 
G.S. Holister, Experimental Stress Analysis, Cambridge University Press, 1967. 
R.C. Dove and P.H. Adams, Experimental Stress Analysis and Motion Measurements, Prentice Hall, 1965. 
;;
ME 415;Review of conservation equations, lumped parameter approach leading to non-linear equations, numerical solutions of non-linear equation. Concept of round off error, overflow, propagation of error. Problems leading to system of linear equations. Techniques for solving system of linear equations (direct and iterative). Scaling and nondimensionalisation. Linear and non linear regression techniques to correlate experimental data. Numerical Integration, calculation of shape factors. Thermal and fluid problems leading to ODE. Initial, Boundary and Eigen value problems. Solutions of ODE using marching and finite difference methods. Characterization of partial differential equations, Numerical solutions of elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic equations encountered in heat transfer and fluid flow. ;;Cebeci,T. and Bradshaw, P., Physical and Computational Aspects of Convective Heat Transfer, Springer-Verlag,1984. 
Cebeci,T. and Bradshaw,P., Momentum Transfer in Boundary Layers, McGraw Hill, 1977. 
Patankar,S.V., Numerical Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow, McGraw Hill, 1980. 
Hirsch,C., Numerical Computation of Internal and External Flows Vols 1 & 2, John Wiley & Sons, 1988. 
Fletcher, C.A.J., Computational Techniques for Fluid Dynamics Vols. 1 & 2, Springer Verlag 1988 
;;
ME 417;Experiments in internal combustion engines and combustion, refrigeration and air-conditioning, steam power, nuclear engineering and production engineering. 
;;;;
ME 425;Tools, their functions in the manufacturing process. General considerations in their design. Jigs and fixtures. Design of locating, clamping and guiding element and their integration. Steel metal working tools, tools for blanking, bedding and drawing operations. Forging dies, die-casting dies. Dies for processing. 

Gauges and inspection fixtures. Tool layout and cam design for automats. 

;ME 328(Exposure);F.W. Wilson, Fundamentals of Tool Design ASTME Publication, 1975. 
C.B. Cole, Tool Design, 1970. 
C. Donaldson, Tool Design, McGraw Hill, 1962. ;;
ME 427;Introduction to fatigue and fracture of machine elements, necessity of designs based on fatigue and fracture. 

High cycle fatigue and low cycle fatigue, fatigue data representation, parameters influencing fatigue strength and life, fatigue phenomena, various stages of fatigue process, designs based on static properties and dynamic properties of materials, fatigue design procedures, preventing fatigue failures. 

Brittle fractures, modes of fracture, linear elastic fracture mechanics, determination of stress intensity factor, fracture toughness, testing elastic-plastic fracture mechanics, design for fracture. Fracture mechanics and fatigue crack propagation. 

Failure analysis, investigation methods, some case studies in fatigue and fracture mechanics. 

;ME 202, ME 301;A.F. Madayag, Metal Fatigue-Design and Theory, 1969. 
L. Sors, Fatigue Design of Machine Components, Pergamon Press, 1971. 
S.T. Rolfe and J.M. Barsom, Fracture and Fatigue Control in Structures, Prentice Hall. 1977. 
D. Broek, Elementary Engineering Fracture Mechanics, Noordhoff, 1975. 
;;
ME 430;Mechanisation and automation, product cycle, hard Vs, flexible automation, capital intensive Vs low cost automation. 
Types of systems mechanical, electrical, hydraulic, pneumatic and hybrid systems. Drives and their selection, synthesis of automatic systems. 

Automation using cams, Geneva mechanisms, gears etc. 

Hydraulic devices, valves, auxiliary elements. 

Synthesis of circuits - Synthesis of pneumatic circuits, hybrid systems. Examples of the above in manufacturing applications. 

Numerical control - Introduction, basic concepts about the machines. 

Part Handling - Introduction to CNC/DNC, basic concepts, mechanisation of part handling, manipulators, industrial robots. 

Introduction to CAD/CAM. Production design for automation. 

;;C. Ray Asfahl, Robotics and Manufacturing, John Wiley & Sons, 1985. 
V. Tergan, I. Andreev and B. Liberman, Fundamentals of Industrial Automation, Mir Publishers, 1986. 
Y. Karen, and J.S.Yun, Numerical Control of Machine Tools, Khanna Publishers 1984, 
S. Pressman and Roger, E. Williams John, Numerical Control and Computer Aided Manufacturing, N.Y. Wiley, 1977. 
;;
ME 431;Classification of machine tools. 

Main motions in machine tools, principles of generation of different types of surfaces, speed drives, feed drives. 

Kinematic analysis. Setting machine tool for various operations. 

Hydraulic drives and control. Electrical drives and control. 

Mechanization and automation of machine tools. Numerically controlled machines. 

Unit head machines and transfer lines. Capacities and characteristics of machine tools, machine tool testing. 

Selection of machine tools. Erection and maintenance. 

Modernization of machine tools. 

;ME 328 (Exposure);J.W. Browne, Theory of Machine Tools, Cassel, 1970. 
A.Gavrushin and others, Metal Cutting Machine Tools, Mir Publishers, 1967 
N. Acherkan, Machine Tool Design, Mir Publishers, 1969. 
;;
ME 433;Constructional features and performance characteristics of petrol and diesel engines, Performance at high altitude and supercharged state. 

Theory of combustion, Study on inlet and exhaust systems. Fuel systems of petrol and diesel engines. Governing of engines. 

;ME 313, ME 314;E.F. Obert, Internal Combustion Engines-Analysis and Practice, International Text book, 1965 
M. Khovakh, Motor Vehicle Engines, Mir, Moscow, 1979.;;
ME 435;Introduction : NC/CNC, CNC machines, Industrial applications of CNC, economic benefits of CNC. CNC Machine Tools: Classification of machine tools, CNC machines tool design, control systems. 
Position control velocity control and machine tool control, Interpolation and electronics. Data Input: Punched tape, manual data input, tape punch, reader error checking. CNC tooling : Qualified and pre-set tooling, tooling systems, tool setting, automatic tool changers, work holding and setting. Programming: Part programming language, programming procedures, proving part programmes, computer aided part programming. Advances : Advances in CNC programming, integration with CAD, material handling in CNC machines, manufacturing systems. 

;;Barry Leatham - Jones, Introduction to Computer Numerical Control, Pitmans, London, 1988. 
R.S. Pressman and J.E. Williams, Numerical Control and Computer Aided Manufacturing, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 1977. 
T.K. Kundra, P.N. Rao and N.K. Tewari, Numerical control and Computer Aided Manufacturing, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Limited, New Delhi 1985. 
W.S. Seames, Computer Numerical Control, Concepts and Programming Delmar Publishers Inc., 1986. 
R.G. Rapello, Essentials of Numerical Control, Prentice Hall, Englewood, Cliffs NJ 1986. 
G.C. Stanton, Numerical Control Programming, John Wiley and Sons, New York 1988. 
;;
ME 443;Brayton refrigeration cycle, regenerative Brayton refrigeration, Martionvsky -Dubinsky cycle, vapour compression cycle, multistage and cascade, air liquification cycles. Energy approach for energy efficient design of refrigeration systems. 
Theories and methods of chilling, freezing and freeze dehydration. 

Microbiology of foods. Food preservation methods. Freezing methods. 

Design of cold storage. 

;;ASHRAE Fundamentals, 1989. 
J.L. Threlkeld, Thermal Environmental Engineering, Second Edition. Prentice Hall, Inc. 1970. 
Lecture Notes , Short Term Course on role of Cryogenics and Refrigeraton in Food Preservation, I.I.T, Bombay, 1977. 
;;
ME 445;The World s requirement of heat and power and how they are supplied. 
The types of fuels which are available, their nature and properties. 

Hydrocarbon fuel testing. Fuel reserves and use of energy in India. 

Synthetic and other fuels. 

Thermodynamics of combustion. Calculation of temperature and equilibrium flame gas composition following constant pressure and constant volume combustion. Elementary chemical kinetics. 

Premixed flames, theories of flame propagation, factors affecting propagation velocity, effects of turbulence. Diffusion flames. 

Burning rates of solid and liquid fuels, combustion of a fuel droplet and fuel sprays, combustion of coal and pulverised particles in air. Combustion in I.C. engines, gas turbine combustion systems. 

;;J.S.S. Brame and J.G. King, Fuels -Solid Liquid and Gaseous, Edward Arnold, 1967. 
A. Murthy Kanury, Introduction to Combustion Phenomena, Gordon and Beach Science Publishers, 1975. 
S.P. Sharma and Chander Mohan, Fuels and Combustion, Tata McGraw Hill, 1984. 
;;
ME 446;Modelling problems in design, operation and control of production systems. Comparing decision rules, costs for decision. Multi product profit volume analysis. Equipment replacement policies. Plant location models, CRAFT layout and its limitations. Application of L.P. in capacity planning, process planning, and machines allocation. 
Application of congestion analysis to man-machine systems and material handling systems. Search for alternatives in process planning. Balancing assembly lines. Control of in process work inventories. Two critical level inventory control. Forecasting demands with trends and seasonal variations. Aggregate planning. 

Classification and choice of acceptance sampling plans. Systems simulation. 

;;E.S. Buffa, Modern Production Management Wiley Eastern, 1975. 
G.K. Groff, and J.F.Muth , Operations Management, Selected Readings, Irwin Taraporewala, 1975. 
H. Bierman, W.H. Hausman and C.P. Bonini, Quantative Analysis for Business Decisions, 1973, 
S.E.Elmaghraby, Design of production Systems, Reinhold, 1966. 
;;
ME 449;Principles of compression and transfer moulding. Positive semipositive and open flash moulds. Design of cavities, loading chambers, mould casting, injection and stripping, heating, guiding systems. Designing moulds for parts with threads, undercuts, thin/walled moulding and those with inserts. 
Design of transfer pot, plunger, sprue runners and gates. Principles of injection moulding, design of moulds, sprues, runners , gates, dimensions and location, hot runner systems, injection and cooling systems. 

Defects in mouldings, causes and remedies. Principles of product design. Methods of mould manufacture and mould design for ease of construction. 

Principle of blow mould design. Detailed design of three moulds. 
;;L. Sors, Plastic Mould Engineering, Pergamon, 1967. 
J.H. Dubois and W.I. Prible, Plastic Mould Engineering, Reinhold, 1965. 
A.B. Glanvil and E.N. Denton, Injection Mould Design Fundamentals, Machinery, 1963. 
;;
ME 450;Basic vibration theory, vibration of one degree-of-freedom systems, two and multidegree of freedom systems. Transient vibrations, vibration of beams. Langrange s equation, vibration measuring and analysing instruments. Basic noise theory, noise and vibration criteria, numerical treatment to vibration and noise problems. ;;W.T. Thomson, Theory of Vibration and Applications, Prentice Hall, 1979. 
R.F.Steidel, An Introduction to Mechanical Vibration, John Wiley and Sons, 1979. 
L.L. Beranek, Noise Reduction, McGraw Hill, 1960. 
;;
ME 456;History of automobiles, automobile and mechancial engineer, function, construction opertion and maintenance of clutch, gear box, fluid drive, automatic transmissions, over drive, universal joints, propeller shaft, final drive differential, back axle. Latest technical developments in drive line, frame, suspension systems, vibration and vehicle dynamics, steering systems, wheels, tires and brakes. Recent developments in running gear. Automobiles industry in India and abroad, testing of automobiles. ;;W.H. Crouse, Automotive Mechanics, Tata McGraw -Hill,1979. 
W.H. Crouse, Automotive Transmission and Power Train, McGraw-Hill, 1967. 
W.H. Crouse, Automobile Chassis and Body, McGraw-Hill 
J.S. McGrath, Automobile Transmission and Drive Line, 1961. 
H.E. Ellinger, Automechanics,1972. 
;;
ME 458;Part print analysis, design for production; processing sequence, machine capacity. Machine selection, manufacturing errors and methods of obtaining the specified dimensions, choice of datum surface for manufacture. Tolerance chart and its applications. 

Process capability, selection of processing parameters, preparatory as well as finishing processes. Production flow analysis, shop layout, group technology. Inspection planning of assembly process. 

Cost estimation. 

;ME 328 (Exposure);V.M. Kovan, Process Engineering, Mir Publishers,1967. 
B. Balakshin, Fundamentals of Manufacturing Engineering, Mir Publishers, 1971. 
Eary and Johnson, Process Engineering, Prentice Hall, 1962. 
F.W. Wilson, Manufacturing Planning and Estimating Handbook, McGraw Hill Book Co. 
;;
ME 462;Introduction to appropriate technology, concepts, criteria and methodology, choice of technology, case studies. Technological alternative for energy and other specific applications. 
Technological need assessment. Scanning spectrum of technology-case studies. 

;;Nicolas Jequier, Appropriate Technology- Problems and Promises, 1976. 
;;
ME 468;Advanced psychrometrics. Analysis of direct contact systems , air washer and cooling tower. Concept of comfort and comfort conditions, evaporative cooling, its application to Indian climate, design of air-condition systems, air distribution system and automatic controls. Application of air-conditioning. ;;Handbook of Airconditioning System Design (Cainer D/c Co). 
;;
ME 470;Torsional Vibrations of shafts: Rotating and reciprocating machines, determination of natural frequencies of the system, harmonic analysis of crankshaft excitation, torsional vibration dampers. Flexural vibrations of shafts, whirling of shafts. 

Critical speeds. Gyroscopic effects. Vibrations of rotating machinery components-blades, disk, centrifugal fan impellers etc Principles of cyclic symmetry. Balancing of rotors - rigid and flexible rotors. Two plane balancing of rigid rotors. Balancing machines. Field balancing of rotors. Bearing influenced rotor dynamics (BIRD), Jeffcot rotor. Lumped parameter modelling of fluid film bearings. Asymmetric and anisotropic bearings, oil whip. 

;ME 326;J.S. Rao, Rotor Dynamics, Wiley Eastern Ltd., New Delhi (1983) 
C.M. Harris and Crede: Shock and Vibrations Hand book, McGraw Hill, New York (1976) 
W. Ker Wilson : Practical Solutions of Torsional Vibration Problems, Chapman and Hall, London (1963) 
;;
ME 473;Finite Element Method: Triangular and quadrilateral elements for solution of problems in solid mechanics, fluid mechanics and heat transfer. Curve fitting, least square method, exponential function method, fourier series method, interpolation with cubic spline. 

Initial value problems: Direct numerical method, Euler s method, Runge-Kutta method, Milne s method, selection of method. Boundary value problems of ordinary differential equations, trial and error method, simultaneous equations method. Eigenvalue problems. 

Digital computer simulation using continuous system modeling program. 

;ME 348 or Equivalent;M.L. James, G.Smith, and J.C. Wolford, "Applied Numerical Methods for Digital Computations, New York, 1985. 
T.R. McCalla, Introduction to Numerical Methods and FORTRAN Programming John Wiley and Sons, Inc. New York, 1967. 
K.C. Rockey, H.R. Evans, and D.W. Griffiths, D.A. Nethercot, The Finite Element Method, Second Edition, Granada, London, 1983. 
;;
ME 477;Need for optimization and historical development, classification and formulation of optimization problem, classical optimization methods, differential calculus, Lagrangian theory, Kuhn Tucker condition, unconstrained minimization techniques, one dimensional minimization technique, one dimensional minimization, Fibonacci, golden section and quadratic interpolation methods, Multidimensional minimization, univariate, conjugate direction gradient and variable metric methods, constrained minimization technique, penalty function methods. Examples and applications of the above methods in the recent engineering design literature. ;;J.S. Arora, Introduction to Optimum Design, McGraw- Hill Book Co, 1989. 
S.S. Rao, Optimization - Theory and Applications, Wiley Eastern Ltd, 1978. 
R.L. Fox, Optimization Methods for Engineering Design, Addison Wesley, 1971 
;;
ME 478;Overview of the development of theory and evolution of the various approaches to management. Contemporary thinking on organization and the engineer s role. Significance and role of accounting, costing (attaching a Rupee tag), auditing and communication. Considerations and challenges in the management of legal and ethical aspects, taxation, innovation, information, technology, quality, finance and human resources. 
Business and social environment, economic efficiency, performance assessment, incentive and reward systems and cases of current interest, highlighting issues and responses. 

;;Stoner, J.A. and Freeman, R.E., Management, PHI 1989 
Massie, J.L., Essentials of Management, PHI 1989 
Parkinson, C.N., Rustomji, M.K. and Sapre, S.A., Great Ideas in Management, IBH 1984 
;;
ME 480;Definitions; Review of one-dimensional conservation equations in single phase flows; Governing equations for homogeneous, separated and drift-flux models; Flow pattern maps for horizontal and vertical systems; Simplified treatment of stratified, bubbly, slug and annular flows. 
Thermodynamics of boiling; Pool boiling- onset of nucleation, heat transfer coefficients, critical heat flux, effect of sub-cooling; Flow boiling- onset of nucleation, heat transfer coefficients, critical heat flux, effect of sub-cooling. 

Condensation- Film and dropwise condensation 

;;Wallis, G.B., One dimensional two-phase flows, McGraw Hill 1969 
Collier, J.B. and Thome, J.R., Convective boiling and condensation, Oxford Science Publications, 1994 
;;
ME 495;Integrated engineering design projects, including details & assembly drawings ready for manufacturing. Projects to be completed in groups or individually in any area of Mechanical Engineering. 

;ME 302, ME 303, ME 3;;;
ME 601; Components of stress and strain; their principal values and invariants. 
Generalised Hooke s law. General 3-D problems and classical theorems. 

Plane stress and plane strain. Airy s stress function. 2-D problems in rectangular and polar coordinates. 

Complex variable approach. Complex representation of stresses, displacements and applied boundary loads. Different methods of solution of 2-d problems for finite and infinite plates with simply and multiply connected regions. 

Experimental methods of stress analysis. Strain gages. 

Photoelasticity. Biorefringent coatings. Brittle coatings. Moire frings. X-ray techniques and holography. 

;;S.P. Timoshenko and J.N. Goodier, Theory of Elasticity, McGraw- Hill, 1982. 
J.W. Dally and W.F. Riely , Experimental Stress Analysis, McGraw-Hill, 1978 
R.C. Dove and P.H. Adams, Experimental Stress Analysis and Motion Measurements, Prentice Hall, 1964 
N.I. Mushelishvili, Some basic problems of the mathematical theory of elasticity, Noordhoof, Netherlands, 1963. 
;;
ME 602;Introduction to fatigue and fracture mechanics, ductile and brittle fractures. Mechanism of fatigue crack initiation and propagation, fatigue data representation, factors influencing fatigue strength, life prediction, prevention of fatigue failures, corrosion fatigue. Linear elastic fracture mechanics, determination of fracture toughness, elastic plastic fracture mechanics, sub-critical growth in reactive environment. Fatigue and fracture safe designs. 
Investigation and analysis of failures, case studies in fatigue and fracture mechanics. 

;;S. Kocanda: Fatigue failure of Metals, Synthofford Noordhoff, 1978. 
N.E. Fros, et al. Metal fatigue, Clarendon Press, 1974. 
D. Broek, Elementary Engineering Fracture Mechanics, Noordhoff, 1975. 
S.T. Rolfe and J.M. Barsom, Fracture and Fatigue Control in Structure, Prentice Hall, 1977. 
American Society for Metals, Case histories in failure analysis, ASM, 1979. 
;;
ME 603; Review of kinematic analysis-mobility, displacement, velocity and acceleration analysis of mechanisms. 
Kinematic synthesis - Function generation, path generation and rigid body guidance. Graphical and analytical techniques of synthesis Dynamic analysis of mechanism - Equations of motion, forward and inverse dynamic analysis, simulation of systems of interconnected rigid bodies. 

Vibration - review of single and two DOF systems. Multi DOF systems vibration, transfer matrix, Holzer and vector iteration techniques. 

Lagrange s equation of motion. Vibrations of continuous systems-axial, torsional and lateral vibration of bars. Introduction to nonlinear and random vibration. 

;;G. Sandor and A.G. Erdman, advanced mechanism design Vol.1 and 2, Prentice Hall of India, 1988. 
A. Ghosh and A.K. Mallik, Theory of Mechanisms and Machines, Affiliated East-West Press, 1988.. 
A.S. Hall, Kinematics and Linkage Design, Prentice HAll, 1964. 
F.S. Tse, I.E. Morse and R.T. Hinkle, Mechanical vibration, CSB publishers and Distributors 1983. 
W.T. Thomson, Theory of vibration with Application, CBS Publishers and Distributors, 1988. 
L. Meirovitch, Elements of vibration analysis, McGraw Hill, 1988. 
;;
ME 604; Introduction. Construction of manipulators, advantages and disadvantages of various kinematic structures. Applications, Actuators, pneumatic, hydraulic and electric. Characteristics and control. 
Nonservo robots, motion planning. Feed back systems, encoders, servo control PTP and CP. Kinematics, homogeneous coordinates, solution of the inverse kinematic problem, multiple solutions, jacobian, work envelopes. Trajectory planning. 

Manipulator dynamics and force control. Sensors: Vision, ranging, laser, acoustic, tactile. Developments in sensor technology, sensory control. Programming Language: VAL, RAIL, AML. Mobile robots, walking devices. Robot reasoning. 

;;K.S Fu, R.C. Gonzalez, C.S.G. Lee, Robotics, McGraw Hill, 1987. 
Y. Koren, Robotics for Engineers, McGraw Hill, 1985 
J.J. Craig, Robotics, Addison-Wesley, 1986. 
;;
ME 605;Metrology of surfaces. Nature of friction and wear processes. Coatings for wear resistance. Theory, testing and control of corrosion. 
Lubricants and bearing materials. Hydrodynamic lubrication. Steady state and dynamically loaded bearing design. Elastohydrodynamic lubrication, rolling element bearing and gear lubrication. 

Lubrication problems at certain extreme environmental conditions, e.g pressure, temperature and vacuum. Experimental techniques in tribology. 

;;E.R. Braithwaite, Solids, Lubricants and Surface, Pergamon, 1967. 
F.P. Bowden and D. Tabor, Friction and Lubrication of Solids, Oxford University, 1971. 
A. Cameron, Principles of Lubrication, Longmans, 1966. 

;;
ME 606; Introduction: Purpose and applications of optimum design, effect of manufacturing errors; Factor of safety; Characteristics of mechanical systems; Selection of optimum configuration; Critical regions; Materials and dimensions; Primary and subsidiary design equations; Limit equations; Normal redundant and incompatible specifications; General techniques; Digital computers in optimum design; Exact and iterative techniques. Optimal design of element and systems; shafts, beams, gears, bearings, springs, high speed machinery, cams, intermittent motion devices, case studies. ;;R.C. Johnson, Optimum Design of Mechanical Element, John Wiley and Sons, 1961 
R.C. Johnson, Mechanical Design Synthesis, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1970. 
R.L. Fox, Optimization Methods for Engineering Design, Addison-Wesley, 1971. 
;;
ME 610; Variable speed drives, theory of friction variable speed drives, types and construction of friction variable speed drives, analysis and design of multiball, torroidal, frontal, Gaaham, planetory cone, planetory ball cluster and other variable speed drives. 
Design of clutches and brakes. 

Design of boundary lubricated, hydrodynamic hydrostatic and rolling element bearings. 
;;Y.I. Esipenko, Mechanical Variable Speed Drives, Gosudardstvennoe Isdatelstvo Teckhnicheskoi Literatury, Kiev, 1961. 
V.S. Polyakov, I.D. Barbash,O.A. Ryakhovsky. Handbook on Clutches Mashinostroehie Leningradskoe Otdelenie, Leningrad, 1974. 
E.I. Radzimovsky, Lubrication of Bearings, The Ronald Press, New York, 1959. 
P. Orlov, Fundamentals of Machine Design MIR Publisher, Moscow, 1980. 
;;
GS 400; Definition and scope, principles of taxonomic classification and nomenclature, nature of fossil record, habitat, Index fossils, diversities, evolution, biostratigraphy, correlation, palaeoenvironmental and palaeogeographic analysis. 
Study of fossils belonging to Porifera, Bryozoa, Coelenterata, Mollusca, Brachiopoda, Arthropoda, Echinodermata, Protochordata, Chordata and important fossil plants; recent contribution to Indian stratigraphic palaeontology. 

;;R.C. More, Lalicker and Fisher, Invertebrate fossils, Mc-Graw Hill Book Co. New York 1952. 
D.M. Raup, and S.M. Stanley, Principles of Palaeontology, W.H. Freeman & Co. San Francisco 1971. 
R.R. Schrock amd W.H. Twenhofel, Principles of Invertebrate palaeontology, McGraw Hill Book Co., New York, 1952. 
S. Kummel and D. Ramp, Handbook of Palaeontological Techniques, W.H. Freeman & Co., San Francisco, 1965 
A.S. Roemer, Vertebrate Palaeontology, Univ. of Chicago Press, 1974. 
;;
GS 401;Geomorphic principles and processes, pedogenesis, morphogenetic reglons, concept of cycle of erosion, fluvial, aeolin coastal, karst and glacial landscapes, methods of analysis of landforms, slopes and drainage, applied geomorphology. 
;;W.D. Thornbury, Principles of Geomorphology, Wiley-Foppan 1969 
A. Holmes, Physical Geology, Nelson, 1965. 
;;
ME 611; Introduction to metal cutting machine tools - Criteria for the selection of operating capacity and design parameters, Kinematics of machine tools Basic principles of machine tool design, Estimation of drive power, Machine tool drives - Electrical, Mechanical and Fluid drives, Stepped and stepless speed arrangements and systems. 
Design of machine tool spindles and bearings. Design of Power screws, Design of slideways, Selective and Preselective mechanisms. 

Machine Tool Structures - Beds, Columns, Tables and Supports, Stock feed mechanism, Measurement and Control of machine tools, Protective and Safety devices. Design of precision machine tools, Microfeeding mechanisms, Concepts of modular design and integration for SPMs. 

Concepts of Aesthetic and Ergonomics applied to machine tools, Acceptance tests and Standardisation of machine tools, Machine tool reconditioning. Latest trends in machine tool design, Introduction to CAD techniques. 

;;Mehta, N.K., Machine Tool Design, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1989. 
Acherkan, N., Machine Tool Design, vol 3&4, Mir publisher, Moscow, 1968. 
Koenigsburger, A., Design Principles of Metal Cutting Machine Tools, Pergamon Press, 1964. 
C.M.T.I. Machine Tool Design Course Notes, C.M.T.I., Banglore. 
Sen, G. and Bhattacharya, A., Principles of Machine Tools, Vol 2. NCB, Calcutta, 1973. 
;;
GS 402; Mode of occurrence, texture and structure, Mineralogical and chemical classification, silicate systems (magmas) binary and ternary, magmatic differentiation, assimilation, global consanguinous associations, petrography and petro- chemistry of acid, Intermediate, basic and ultrabasic groups, petrogenesis of ultramatics, anorthosites, charnockites, granites, nepheline syenlites and carbonatites. ;;D.W. Hyndman, Petrology and Igneous and Metamorphic rocks, McGraw Hill 1965. 
Carmichael, J. Turner and Verhoogen, Igneous Petrology, McGraw Hill 1974. 
K.G. Cox, J.D. Bell, and R.J. Pankhurst, Interpretation of Igenous Rocks, George Allen and Unwin 1979. 
;;
GS 403;Crystal formations; laws, arrangements of points in space and symmetry; space lattice, symmetry elements, crystal projections, crystal faces, axes and Miller indices, zonal relations, study and measurements of crystals, crystal classes and derivation of Herman Maugin system, twin laws. 
Polarizing microscope, properties of light, polarization, interference, Snell"s law, measurement of R.I., interference, dispersions, total reflection, interference colour and figures, optic sign, 2 V extinction angle, elongation direction and pleochroic schemes. Principles of U-Stage techniques. 

;;L.G. Berry and B. Mason, Mineralogy Ch.2 pp.12-149, Freeman 1959. 
F.C. Phillips, An Introduction to Crystallography, Longmans Green 1963. 
A.N.Winchell, Optical Mineralogy, Wiley, 2nd Edition, 1971. 
;;
GS 404; classification, detailed study and nomenclature, description of gravels, sandstones, shales, silstones, limestones, dolomites and nonclastic sediments. Provenance, dispersal and depositional environments, lithification and diagenesis. ;;F.J. Pettijohn, Sedimentary Rocks, Harper, 1975. 
J.C. Griffiths, Scientific Method in Analysis of Sediments, McGraw Hill, 1967. 
R.E. Carver, Procedures in Sedimentary Petrology, Wiley, 1971. 
;;
ME 613; Introduction, Finite element formulation-variational method, method of weighted residuals, etc. Linear elastic stress analysis-2D, 3D and axisymmetric problems. Analysis of structural vibration, stability, heat conduction, fluid flow, etc. 
Boundary element formulation for heat conduction and 2D stress analysis. Case studies. 

;;O.C Zienkiewicz, The Finite Element Method, 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1983. 
C.S. Desai and J.F. Abel, Introduction to Finite Element Method, Affiliated East-West Press, 1977. 
R.D. Cook, Concepts and Application of Finite Element Analysis, John Wiley , 2nd Edition,1981. 
C.A. Brebbia and S. Walker, Boundary Element Techniques in Engineering, Newness Butterworths, 1980. 
P.K. Banerjee and R. Butterfield, Boundary Element Method in Engineering Science, McGraw-Hill, 1981. 
;;
GS 405;Mineralogy, chemistry of minerals, physics of minerals, determinative mineralogy including optical properties, description of silicates, native elements, sulphides, oxides, hydroxides, halides, carbonates, nitrates, borates, sulphates, chromates, tungstates, phosphates, arsenates, molybdates, vanadates, clay mineralogy. ;;L.G. Berry and B. Mason, Mineralogy, Freeman Chs.1,3,4,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15, 1959. 
P.F. Kerr, Optical Mineralogy, McGraw Hill, 1959. for optical properties of minerals. 
Deer, Howle & Zussman, An Introduction to the Rock-forming Minerals, Longman, 1966. 
;;
ME 614; Objectives of material handling systems and the basic principles, classification and selection of material handling equipment. 
Characteristics and applications. Discussion of various material handling equipments functions and parameters effecting service. 

Packaging and storage of materials and their relations with material handling. Theory, construction and design of various component parts of mechanical handling devices, wire ropes, chains, hooks, shackles, grabs, ladles, and lifting electromagnets, pulleys, sheaves, shears , sprockets and drums, winches, brakes and ratchet stops, gears and power transmission systems, runner wheels and rails, buffers and controls of travel mechanisms. 

Kinematics and dynamic analysis of various types of cranes and elevators. Stability and structural analysis. Discussion of principles and application of conveyors and related equipment. Design of various types of conveyors and their elements. Fault finding and failure analysis of material handling systems. System design and economics. 

;;N. Rudenko, Materials Handling Equipments, Peace Publishers, Moscow, 
Spivakowsky and V. Dyachke, Conveyors and Related Equipments, Peace Publishers, Moscow. 
R. John Immer, Materials Handling McGraw-Hill 1953 
E. Ernst, Die Hebezeuge, Band I and II, Springer Verlag, 1978. 
;;
GS 406; Types of metamorphism, textures, structures, and classification of metamorphic rocks. Factors of metamorphism, thermodynamic principles of metamorphic reactions, metamorphic zones. Facies of contact and regional metamorphism, ocean floor metamorphism. 
Mineral paragenesis, their presentation and significance, experimental studies on metamorphic reactions and stability fields of minerals. 

Metasomatism and metamorphic differentiation. Facies series and baric types. Eclogities, migmatites and charnockites. 

;;H.G.F. Winkler, Metamorphic rocks, Springer, 1976. 
B. Bhaskar Rao, Metamorphic Petrology, IBH & Oxford, 1986. 
;;
GS 407;Mechanical principles, folds-description, field study, techniques in fold analysis, mechanics and causes; joints; description and classification of faults, criteria, reverse fault, thrust, over thrust, normal fault, transform and strike-slip fault; dating structural events; diapirs, forms and structures of extrusive and intrusive igneous rocks. Emplacement of large plutons, foliation and lineation and their relation to major structures, impact structures, hypothesis regarding origin and nature of tectonic forces. ;;G.H. Davis, Structural Geology of Rocks and Regions, Wiley, 1984. 
M.P. Billings, Structural Geology, 3rd ed. Prentice Hall, 1982. 
;;
GS 409;Types of aerial photographs, flight planning, geometry of the aerial photographs, relief and tilt displacements, vertical exageration, stereoscopic measurements, templates and radial triangulation. 
Crieteria for photointerpretation, photogeological, photogeomorphic and photopedological interpretation geomorphic mapping, analysis of slopes and drainage. 

;;L.H. Lattman and R.G. Ray - Aerial photographs in Field Geology, 1965. 
J.J. Huson, and R.A. van Zuidam, Elementary Exercises for the Courses Geography - Geomorphology, 1968. 
N3/4-I.T.C., Delft, The Netherlands, D.S. Way, (1973) Terrain Analysis, McGraw Hill. 
;;
GS 410;Study and illustration of representative fossils belonging to Mollusca, Brachlopoda, Echinodermata, Arthropoda, Graptoloidea, Chordata and Gondwana plants; preparation of stratigraphic distribution, range charts and correlation schemes, dating of fossilliferous sequences, population and size analysis, palaeoenvironmental and palaeogeographical reconstructions. 
;;R.C. Moore, Lalicker and Fisher: Invertebrate Fossils, McGraw Hill Book Co., New York 1952. 
R.R. Schrock and Twenhofel, Principles of Invertebrate Palaeontology, McGraw Hill Book Co. New York, 1952. 
H. Woods, Invertebrate Palaeontology, International Book Bureau, 1966. 
A.S. Roemer, Vertebrate Palaeontology, Univ. Chicago Press, 1966. 
;;
GS 411;Preparation of symmetry stereograms, stereograms, crystallographic problems solved by stereographic interaxial angles and calculations. 
Stereographic projections. 

Study of minerals under transmitted light, determination of R.I., colour, pleochroism, fast-slow directions, birefringence, extinction angle, twins, +ve or -ve crystals, uni-or bi-axial or isotropic character, 2V, dispersion phenomenon. Determination of thickness of the mineral section, calibration or magnification. 

Megascopic study of hand specimens of minerals belonging to silicates, native elements, sulphides, oxides, hydroxides, carbonates, halides, phosphates, sulphates etc. Structural formula and mineral end member percentage calculations. U-stage Methods. 

;;A.N. Winchell, Elements of Optical Mineralogy, II Wiley. 
L.G. Berry and B. Mason, Mineralogy, Freeman, 1957. 
;;
GS 412;Study of textures and mineral composition of igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic rocks, their identification and classification. Model analysis of rocks, study of size, shapes, roundness, packing and orientation of particles. CIPW norms, Niggll values, variation diagrams. ACF, AKF and AFM diagrams. ;;;;
GS 413; Determination of thickness of beds and depth to beds. Preparation, study and interpretation of geologic maps. Trigonometric,orthographic and stereographic solutions to fold and fault problems.;;;;
GS 500;Classification and genesis of ore deposits,ore fluids and their relation to magma and metamorphic processes; theories of transportation and deposition of ores, physicochemical controls of ore deposition, wallrock alteration, paragenesis, zoning, geothermometry, characteristics of epigentic, sedimentary, residual and supergene enrichment deposits, metamorphism of ores. 
Occurrence, properties and distribution of metallic, non-metallic, coal, oil and gas deposits in India. Metallogenetic provinces and epochs in India. Geology of Indian ore deposits, and their utilization. Preparation of feasibility reports. 

;;D.F. Park & R.A. MacDiarmid, Ore Deposits, Freeman, 1964. 
A.M. Bateman, Economic Mineral Deposits, Wiley, 2nd edition, 1979. 
R.L. Stanton, Ore Petrology, McGraw Hill,1981. 
Ladoo and Myers, Non-metallic Minerals,McGraw Hill, 1951. 
V.I. Smirnov, Ore Deposits, Mir Publ. Moscow. 
R.K. Sinha, Treatise on Indian Minerals, Allied Publ., 1967. 
;;
GS 501;Principles of reflection optics preparation of polished sections, optical properties of opaque ore minerals, chemical methods in ore microscopy, quantitative methods of microchardness and reflectivity measurements, ore textures, application of ore microscopy. ;;E.N. Cameron, Ore Microscopy, 1961. 
Craig and Vaughan, Ore Microscopy and Ore Petrography, Wiley 1981. 
Henry and Galopin, Microscopic Studies of Opaque Minerals, 1972. 
;;
GS 502;Geological mapping, reconnaissance, surfaceindication, methods of prospecting for various minerals, delineation of ores,reserve estimation, drilling and logging,underground mapping and correlation of plans & sections, guides for ore search. 
Principles and methods of geochemical prospecting including study of geochemistry of earth, geochemical cycle, tracers in rocks and soils, primary & secondary dispersion, geochemical anomalies and their interpretation. Geophysical methods in prospecting. 

;;M.E. McKinstry, Mining Geology, Asia, 1980. 
M.B. Dobrin, Introduction to Geophysical Prospecting, McGraw Hill, 1985. 
H.E. Hawkes and J.S. Webb, Geochemistry in Mineral Exploration, Harper, 1980. 
;;
GS 503;Origin of earth and moon, geochronology,temperature of the earth, seismic waves, observational seismology, instrumental seismology, transmission of seismic waves, causes of earth-quakes. 
Interpretation of the structure of earth, mass, shape, size of earth, measurement of gravity, isostasy, geomagnetism, terrestrial electricity, geomagnetic and geoelectric instrumentation. Tectonic forces and general geotectonics. 

;;B.F. Howellor, Introduction to Geophysics, McGraw Hill 1959. 
P.J. Hart, The Earth"s Crust and Upper Mantle, Am. Geophysics Union, Monograph No.15, 1969. 
P.J. Wyllie, The Dynamic Earth, J. Wiley 1971. 
;;
GS 504;Geological mapping, reconnaissance, surface indication, methods of prospecting for various minerals, delineation of ores,reserve estimation, drilling and logging, underground mapping and correlation of plans & sections, guides for ore search. 
Mines, mining method: surface and underground mine evaluation, mineral economics and its concept, peculiarities inherent in mineral industry, mining laws, mineral taxation and incentive measures, national mineral policy, growth of mining industry and mineral resources, location of mines and associated industries in India,conservation and substitution. 

;;H.L. Hartman, Introductory Mining Engineering, John Wiley, 1987. 
R.K. Sinha & N.L. Sharma, Mineral Economics, Oxford and IBH Publishing 1970. 
H.E. McKinstry, Mining Geology, Asia, 1980. 
;;
GS 505;Elements, their classification and distribution in different rocks, stability of nuclides, cosmic abundance, abundance in meteorites and rocks. Thermodynamics and mineral equilibria, chemical weathering and alteration, colloids and solutions, Eh-pH in natural environments. 
Hydrogeochemistry and chemical sedimentation. 

Diffusion and solid state reactions. Geochemistry of ore forming minerals. Isotope geochemistry of C, O, U, Th, K, Sr etc. different rocks. Age determination of rocks. 

;;K.B. Krauskopf, Introduction to geochemistry, McGraw Hill, 1969. 
H. Faure, Nuclear Geology, Wiley 1954. 
B. Masson, Principles of Geochemistry, Wiley 1983. 
;;
ME 616; Introduction to Grifftc s surface energy and Irwin s stress intensity factor. Stress analysis of fracture, Westegaard s and William s stress functions. Analytical, numerical and experimental methods of determining stress intensity factors. Macroscopic theories in crack extension. Mixed mode fracture mechanics, fracture mechanics based design and fracture control plans. Fatigue crack growth. 

Elasticplastic fracture : Small scale yielding. The J-Integral. 

Stationary crack tip fields. J-integral testing. Engineering approach to plastic fracture. Ductile fracture criterion. J-controlled crack growth and stability. 

;ME;A.P. Parkar, The Mechanics of Fracture and Fatigue, An Introduction, E and F.N. Spon Ltd. London 1981. 
S.T. Rolfe and J.M. Barson, "Fracture and Fatigue control in Structures, Prentice Hall Inc. New Jersy, 1977. 
V.G. Ukadgaonker, Lecture Notes on QIP Course on Fundamentals of Fracture Mechanics, IIT Bombay, Dec. 1987. 
M.F. Kanninen and C.H. Popelar, "Advanced Fracture Mechanics", Oxford University Press, 1985. 
J.W. Hutchinson, "Nonlinear Fracture Mechanics, "Department of Solid Mechanics, The Technical University of Denmark Publications, 1979. 
;;
GS 506;Principles and code of stratigraphic nomenclature, geological time-scale,standard systems for lithostratigraphy,biostratigraphy and chronostratigraphy, facies concept and facies analysis, correlation by physical and palaeontological methods, palaeoenvironmental and palaeo geographical reconstructions. 
Structure and tectonics of India, Precambrian geology, Cuddapah, Vindhyans,Palaeozoics of Himalayas, Gondwana Supergroup; selected study of Triassic,Jurassic, Cretaceous and Tertiary sequences, subsurface geology and stratigraphy of Ganga, Bengal, Cauvery, Krishna-Godavari, Kutch and Rajasthan basins, Deccan Traps, Siwallks and Quaternary formations; structure and evolution of Himalayas; faunal and floral distribution through geological time. 

;;M.S. Krishnan, Geology of India and Burma, CBS Publ. & Distr. 1982. 
D.N. Wadia, Geology of India, Tata McGraw Hill Publ. Co. 1975. 
E. Pascoe, A Manual of the Geology of India and Burma, Govt. of India Publ. 1959. 
W.C. Krumbein and L.L. Sloss, Stratigraphy and Sedimentation, W.H. Freeman & Co. 1951. 
;;
GS 507;Geology applied to engineering problems such as dam sites and reservoir foundations, highway and building structures, tunnels, geology of construction materials, landslides, case histories, engg. properties of rocks and soils, engineering classification of rocks and soils. 
Earthquakes and aseismic design of structures. 

Hydrologic cycle, groundwater occurrence and movement, water table and its fluctuations, aquifers systems, well hydraulics,recharge methods, conservation of ground water. 

;;Krynine and Judd, Principles of Engineering Geology and Geotechnics, McGraw Hill. 
I.W. Farmer, Principles of Engg. Geology 1976. 
D.K. Todd, Ground Water Hydrology, Wiley, 1980. 
H.M. Raghunath, Ground Water, Wiley Eastern, 1987. 
;;
GS 508;Classification of coal, morphology, formation and composition of peat, lignite, anthracite. Coal series, terminology, structure and petrography of coals. Stratigraphic studies of coalfields of India. 
Uses. 

Geologic history of petroleum. Reservoir rocks, their mechanics and structure, various methods of prospecting. Physical and chemical properties of oil, uses,distribution. Study of oil fields in India and other countries. 

;;W. Francis, Coal, Edward Arnold Ltd, 1961. 
A.I. Levorsen, Geology of Petroleum, Freeman & co. 1970. 
;;
GS 511;Chemical analysis of rocks and minerals by calorimetric method, X-ray equipment and calculation of cell parameters. Study of spectrograph assembly taking standard spectra. Determination and measurements of characteristic spectral lines. Use of geophysical instruments to measure resistivity, susceptibility, radioactivity etc. of U, Th using nuclear counting and fission tracks. ;;;;
GS 513;Polishing of ore minerals, study of optical properties of ore minerals, determinative ore microscopy, etch tests, reflectivity and microhardness measurements, ore textures and structures. ;;R.L. Stanton, Ore Petrology, Elsevier, 1981. 
P. Ramdohr, Ore Minerals and their intergrowths, Longman, 1969. 
;;
GS 515;Examination of rocks, and their engineering properties, compressive strength, elastic parameters and porosity determinations, properties of aggregate, study of hydraulic data and their interpretation, hydrogeological maps. ;;;;
ME 618; Preliminary considerations. Design construction and features. Stress analysis of components-shells, ends, flanges, local attachements, etc. 
Material selection. Special type of vessels- high pressure applications, externally loaded vessels, etc. Design of piping system. 

Use of Codes. 

;;J.F. Harvey, Pressure Vessel Design : Nuclear and Chemical Applications, Van Nostrand, 1983. 
S.S. Gill, The Stress Analysis of Pressure Vessel Components, Pergamon Press, 1970. 
R.W. Nichols, Pressure Vessel Engineering Technology, Elsevier, 1971. 
;;
GS 521;Mathematical and statistical models, models in geology, geologic data and precision,elements of probability, Univariate statistical methods, continuous and discrete density functions, parameters and statistics, methods of parameter estimation confidence intervals and significance, tests of hypothesis, analysis of variance,regression and correlation. 
Multivariate analysis, testing of hypothesis, component and factor analysis, multiple regression, correlation, polynomial regression, cannonical correlation, discrimination MANOVA, MANCOVA. 

;;E.S. Keeping, Introduction to Statistical Inference, Van Nostrand, 1962. 
Cooley and Lohrens Introduction to Multivariate Data Analysis, Wiley,1971. 
;;
GS 523;Introduction and principles of micropalaeontology, occurrence of microfossils in rocks and sediments, field collection and preparation techniques. Statistical analysis of microfossils, biomatrix. 
Principles of microbiostratigraphy, and palaeoenvironmental analysis, applied micropalaeontology. 

Detailed study of microfossil groupsForaminifera, Radiolaria, Ostracoda,Conodonta, Holothuroidea, Tintinnids, their morphology, classification, evolution,study of important genera and their distribution in time and space; micropalaeontology of oceans; palynological principles and techniques; introduction to nanofossils and their economic use. 
;;D.J. Jones, Introduction to Microfossils, Harper Bros., 1956. 
J.A. Cushman, Foraminifera and their Economic Use, Harvard Univ. Press, 1976. 
M.F. Glaessner, Principles of Micro-palaeontology, Wiley Inc.New York, 1945. 
;;
GS 525;Soils, textural and engineering classifications, soil properties, porosity and permeability characteristics, strength characteristics, and their significance in engineering structures and foundations. 
Clay mineralogy, types and structures of clay minerals, optical, X-Ray, thermal and differential thermal analysis as applied to clays. Source and environments of clay deposition, application of clay minerals in engineering. 
;;R.E. Grim, Clay Mineralogy, McGraw Hill, 1953. 
D.W. Taylor, Fundamentals of Soil Mechanics, Asia Pub. House, 1959. 
;;
GS 524;Tectonic fabric: concept, symmetry, graphic treatment of fabric data, mesoscopic,macroscopic and microscopic analysis, general objectives and techniques, Interpretation of tectonite fabrics. Preferred orientation, follation and lineation. 
Folding in tectonites, interpretation of folds as heterogeneous structures of fold systems. 

;;F.J. Turner & L.E. Weiss, Structural analysis of Metamorphic Tectonites, McGraw Hill 1979. 
;;
ME 620; Computer aided methods of solving stress analysis and vibration problems, solution to multidegree, free and forced vibration problems with damping. Analysis of continuous systems. 
Stress analysis of shafts and beams of varying section subjected to varying loads. Analysis of plates, solution to axisymmetric problems. 

;;D.J. Hater, Matrix Computer Methods of vibration Analysis, Butterworths, 1973. 
P.C. Wang, Numerical and Matrix Method in Structural Mechanics, John Wiley, 1966. 
Scare Application of Finite Difference Equations to Shell Analysis, Pergamon Press, 1967. 
;;
GS 526;Waves and currents, catastrophic waves from the sea; beaches, continental shelves; continental slopes; trenches; canyons deep ocean floor and various topographic features - ridges, seamounts; coral reefs,sediments, mineral deposits of the seabed; man and ocean. ;;Shephard, Submarine Geology, Harper and Row, 1973. 
K.K. Turkinian Ocean, Prentice Hall, 1973. 
;;
GS 528;Structural and compositional differences between continental and oceanic regions, igneous activities and techonogenesis, geosyncline, Inter - and circumcontinental mountain chains, island arcs, shields, basins, time and space in geotectonics. Global tectonics, theories and causes of geotectonics. ;;V.V. Belousov, Basic Problems in Geo- tectonics, McGraw Hill, 1962. 
P.C. Badgley, Structural and Tectonic Principles, 1965. 
;;
GS 550;Exploration risks and rewards grid exploration response and search strategies. Delineation and evaluation of ore bodies, surveys of large and small prospects. Specialized sampling and estimation of grade and reserve. Case histories Geological, geophysical and geochemical considerations for selection of drill sites. Physiographic mapping. 
Transport and supply lines. Principles and methods of onshore and offshore drilling and logging. 

;;Brantiey J.L. Rotary Drilling Handbook Plenum Inc., 1981 
Pirson S.J. Handbook of Well Log Analysis Prentice Hall, 1980 
Hawkes, H.E. and Webb J.S. Geochemistry in Mineral Exploration, Harper 1980 
Le Roy L.W. Subsurfaces Geological Methods Colorado School of Mines, 1975. 
;;
GS 606;Remote sensing techniques. Application of remote sensing data to regional, geological and structural mapping; Utilization of remote sensing in mineral prospecting, hydrogeological investigations and engineering geological studies, Terrain evaluation and land use studies, Case histories. ;;F.F. Sabnis, Remote sensing-Principles and Investigations, W.K. Freeman & Co. 1978 
H.H. Verstappen, Remote Sensing in geomorphology, ITCEnschede, Netherlands, 1978 
R.G. Reeves, Introduction to electromagnetic remote sensing-applications to geology & hydrology, American Society for Photography. 
;;
ME 624; Overview: computer interfacing, continuous and discrete data, data converters. 
Sampling fundamentals: stroboscopic and process models of sampling, sampling theorem, aliasing, frequency domain interpretation of sample and hold. 

Transform analysis of sampled data systems: Fourier and Laplace transforms, starred and Z-transforms, block diagram analysis, implimentation of continuous filters in difference equations, design of sampled data systems using z- and w-planes. 

State space formulation: state transition matrix, concept of observability and controllability, stability analysis, state feedback and pole placement. 

Design case studies of computer controlled systems. 

;;M. Gopal, Digital Control Engineering, Wiley Eastern Limited, 1988. 
G.F. Franklin, J.D. Powell and M.L. Workman, Digital Control of Dynamic Systems, Addison Wesley, 1990 
K.J. Antrom, and B. Wittenmark, Computer Controlled Systems, Prentice Hall, 1984. 
;;
GS 607;The tectonic fabric, its geometric analysis. Deformation of rocks-theory and experiments. Applications of experimental data to tectonites. Principles and interpretation of tectonic fabric. 
Interpretation of lineation, foliation, folds and fold systems. Faults and fracture patterns. 

;;Ramsay, J.G. and Huber, M.I. The tectonics and modern structural Geology, Academic Press, 1983 
Turner, F.J. and Weiss, L.E. Structural Analysis of Metamorphic Tectonites, McGraw Hill, 1979 
Ramsay, J.G. Folding and Fracturing Rocks, McGraw Hill, 1967. 
;;
GS 608;Deterministic, statistical and stochastic models. Paarametric univariate/multivariate stochastic models (Time Domain) Modelling geological surface in 2 and 3 dimensions; modelling of point values and accumulated values in 1,2 and 3 dimensions. Forecasting and control, Reverse estimation. Kriging and Simulation techniques in modelling. ;;Journal, A.G. and Huijbregts, C. Mining Geostatistics, Academic, 1979 
Anderson, O.D. Times Series Analysis and Forecasting. Butterworth, 1979 
David, M. Geostatistics, Elsevier, 1975. 
;;
GS 609;Principles, methods and scope. Refraction and reflection seismic methods. Electrical profiling and depth-sounding. S.P., L.P. and electromagnetic methods. Gravity, magnetic, radioactive and geothermal methods applied to mineral, ground water and oil exploration. Bedrock and site investigation. Tectonic and earthquake studies. ;;Dobrin, M.B. Introduction to Geophysical Prospecting (3rd Ed.) McGraw Hill, 1976. 
;;
ME 625;Fundamentals of material removal process, Mechanics of chip formation, material deformations, Oblique machining, Mechanistic model of Cutting Forces /Torque / Power, Tool temperature and Tool wear, Deterministic and Stochastic Tool life equations, Machinability, Optimisation of material removal processes. 
Single and Multiple tool geometry, Tool materials, tool grinding. Study of processes like Turning, Drilling, Milling and Grinding. New materials (composites, ceramics) and typical nontraditional manufacturing processes. 

;;Bhattacharya A., Metal Cutting Theory and Practice. New Central Book Agency, 1984. 
Boothroyd.G., Fundamentals of Metal Machining and Machine Tools, McGraw Hill Book Co, 1975. 
Oxley.P.L.B., The Mechanics of Machining. Chichester, Ellis Har-wood, 1989. 
Shaw.M.C., Metal Cutting Principles. Clarendon, Oxford, 1984. 
McGeough J., Advanced Methods of Machining. Chapman and Hall, London, 1988. 
;;
GS 610;Nature and scope. Industrial Locations. Principles and problems. 
Concentration of Industries. Industrial combines and pricing policy. 

Taxation of mineral industries. Industrial growth and progress. Five year plans. Mineral policy of India. 

;;Indian Mineral Year Book, IBM, 1983. 
Sinha, S.K. and Sharma R.K. Mineral Economics, Oxford and IBH, 1970. 
;;
GS 611;Basic themochemistry of mineral systems. Mineral stabilities, P-T-X and isothermal diagrams of dry and aqueous (select) systems like sulphide, carbonate and oxide systems. 
Fluid and aquatic chemistry at low and high temperatures and rock-wataer interaction. 

Elemental distribution and geochemistry. Magmatic metamorphic, sedimentary, hydrothermal and residual deposits. Secondary enrichment. Modern views on classification and genesis. 

;;Akira Sasaki, Suhunso Ishihara and Yotaro Seki. Mineral Resources Engineering Geology, John Wiley, 1975. 
;;
GS 612;Crystal chemistry and stability of ore minerals segregation, mixing,nucleation, growth, deformation and annealing in ore minerals. 
Ore solution chemistry. 

Ore and ore textures in mafic, ultramafic, felsic, marine, non-marine,volcanic and sedimentary rocks. Metamorphic association, veins, bedded, stratiform and stratabound types. Ore and tectonic cycles. 

;;Stanton, R.L. Ore Petrology, Elsevier, 1981. 
Ramdhor, P. Ore Minerals and their intergrowths Pergamon Press, 1969. 
;;
GS 613;Carbon cycles, origin of organic matter, composition of petroleum and its products. Origin, migration and accumulation of oil and gas. 
Habitat of petroleum in source rocks and reservoirs. Reservoir rocks and structures. Processes of hydrocarbon generation. Application of geochemistry to oil exploration. Indian case histories. 
;;Hunt, J.M. Petroleum Geochemistry and Geology, Freeman, 1979 
Tissot, B.P. and Welte, D.H. Petroleum Formation and Occurrence, Springer Verlag, 1978. 
;;
ME 630;Introduction Development of Databases and Knowledge bases, Knowledge representing paradigms - Rule based, Logic based, Object oriented, Semantic nets and frames, Uncertainty, Fuzzy logic, Neural nets. 
Inference mechanism: Goals, Control strategies, Forward and Backward chaining, Conflict resolution, Explanation, Blackboard model. 

Implementation issues: Knowledge acquisition, Coding, Expert system shells, PROLOG and LISP. Selected applications in manufacturing: Product design, Process Planning and Scheduling, Robot movement, Factory layout, Defect analysis, Diagnostic maintenance, Quality control, etc. 

;;Kerr, R., Knowledge Based Manufacturing Management, Addison-Wesley, 1991. 
Addis, T.R., Designing Knowledge Based System, Prentice Hall, 1985. 
Rolston, D.W., Principles of Artificial Intelligence and Expert Systems Development, McGraw Hill, 1988. 
Chung, P.W.H and Lovegrove, G., Industrial and Engineering Applications of AI and Expert Systems, Gordon & Breach Science Publ, 1993. 
Maus, R. and Keyes, J., Handbook of Expert Systems in Manufacturing, McGraw Hill, 1991. ;;
GS 614;Coal: Classification and types, petrography, properties and analysis, origin, stratigraphy, mining and reserves. Mine development, economics and case histories. Coal fields of India. 
Nuclear raw materials: Distribution in rocks, mineralogy properties, origin, occurrences and utilization. Waste disposal. 

;;Aswathanarayana, U. Nuclear Geology, Tata McGraw Hill, 1985 
Stach, E. Stach"s, Text Book of Coal Petrology, Gebrudder Borntgraeger, Berlin, 1975. 
;;
GS 615;Rock material and rock mass characteristics. Mine surveying and sampling. Open pit and underground mining methods and factors influencing the choice. Mine supports subsidence and mine environment. 
Reserves and prospects. 

Analysis of stress and strain. Stress distribution at depths. Bearing capacity of rock mass, influence of porosity and internal fluid pressure Reeology and time dependent behaviour, microseismicity. 

Dynamic properties. Blasting discontinuities in rock mass and their influence. Model and dimensional analysis of rock behaviour. 

;;Roberts, A. Applied Geotechnology, Pergamon, 1981. 
Thomas, R.J. An Introduction to Mining, Robert Burton Printers, 1978 
Lewis, R.S. Elements of Mining, John Wiley, 1974 
Stagg, K.G. and Zienkiewics, C.C. Rock Mechanics in Engg. Practice, John Wiley, 1969. 
;;
GS 616;Earth and atmosphere. Earth materials, weathering, soil and mass wasting. Surface and subsurface waters and their importance in environment. Natural hazards earthquakes & volcanism - prediction and environmental impact. 
Mining, quarrying, utilisation of minerals & oil and effects on environment. Environmental impact of urbanization & engineering constructions like dams. Groundwater level changes. Pollution of water & land by industrial & other effluents. Case histories.
;;Flawn, P.T. Environmental Geology, Harper, 1975 
Betz, F. Environmental Geology, Stroudsburg, 1975. 
;;
GS 617;Major structural units of the earth. Orogenic belts and world rift sytems. Physical properties of the earth"s interior. Composition of the mantle and the nature of the crust-mantle boundary. Structure, petrology andcomposition of the earths crust. Magma generation. 
Palaeomagnetism, Polar wandering and sea-floor spreading. Plate tectonics and metallogeny. 

;;Gass, I.G., Smith, P.J. and Wilson, R.C.L. Understanding the Earth-The Artemis Press Ltd., 1982 
Ringwood, A.E. Composition and Structure of the earth"s mantle, McGraw Hill, New York, 1975 
Wyllie, P.J. The Dynamic Earth, John Wiley, 1971. 
;;
GS 618;Slope stability. Stability as applied to soils and rocks. Methods of stability analysis. Classification of type of failure. Analysis of planar and wedge shear failure by geometric and stereographic methods. 
Slipping failure by influence of dynamic force. Stability curves and their use;slope stabilization measures for excavations, subsidence, protection of surface and subsurface structures from subsidence. 

Analysis of roof and sidewall stability in the underground excavations. 

Case histories. 

;;E. Hock and Bray, J.W. Rock Slope Engineering, Institute of Mines & Metallurgy, 1977. 
A. Young, Slopes, Longman, 1972 
;;
ME 632; Introduction to Assembly Techniques, Selective and Interchangeable assembly. Tolerance analysis, Stochastic analysis of dimensional chains. 
Permanent and movable joints: Rivetted, Welded and Bonded joints. 

Assembly of bearings, Dynamic balancing. 

Assembly tools and fixtures, Planning, Single product and multi-product assembly lines, Testing of assemblies and PMTS analysis. 

Mechanised assembly: Part orientation, feeding and positioning devices, Assembly machines, Transfer systems, Robotic assembly. Recent developments in assembly engineering: Design for manufacture and assembly concepts (DFMA). 

;;Boothroyd, G., Automatic Assembly, McGraw Hill, 1982. 
Fortini, E.T., Dimensioning for Interchangeable Manufacture. Industrial Press Inc., NY, 1967. 
Balakshin, B.S., Automatic Adjusting Machine Tool, Mir Publishers, Moscow, 1967. 
Denilevsky, V., Engineering Manufacturing Processes in Machine and Assembly Shops, Foreign Language Publ., Moscow, 1962 
Spotts, M.F., Dimensioning and Tolerancing for Quality Production, Prentice Hall EnglewoodCliffs, 1983. 
;;
GS 620;Physio-chemical properties of sea-water and sediment-water, basement-water interactions. Sea-water geochemistry. Marine placers marine evaporities and carbonates, their origin, petrology & geochemistry. Phosphorites, barites, Pb-Zn sulphides, Mn and Fe nodules: their morphology, chemistry and origin. Fe and Mn in marine sediments Marine hydrothermal deposits and hot brines. 
Mineral deposits of covergent, accreting and divergent, plates. 

Intraplate deposits of orogenic belts and platforms. Marine mining methods for bed rocks and surficial deposits. Legal and environmental aspects of marine mining. 

;;Shepherd, F.P. Submarine Geology, Harper, 1983 
Broecker, W.S. and Peng, T.H. Tracers in the Sea, Columbia Univ. Press, 1982. ;;
GS 622;Electrical properties of rocks and minerals, Geoelectrical methods of prospecting, classification of well logging methods, well drilling, formation evaluation. Electrical logging: Normal log, lateral log, latero log, Induction logging, spontaneous polarization logging, microlog, electric log combination. 
Radio-active logging: Natural Gamma radiation logging, Gamma ray density logging, and Neutron logging, Sonic log, gravity log and susceptibility log, thermal measurements, saturation estimation, well logging interpretation with field examples. 

;;Darwin V. ellis, Well logging for Earth Scientists - Elsevier, Amsterdam (1987) 
Lynch, E.J., Formation Evaluation, English Book Depot, Dehradun (1976) 
Robinson, E.S. and Coruh, C., Basic exploration Geophysics, J. Wiley & Sons, Inc. U.S.A. (1988) 
Telford, W.M., Geldart, I.P., Sheriff, R.K. and Keys, D.A., Applied Geophysics, Cambridge Univ. Press, London (1990) 
;;
ME 636; Analysis of heat sources for material joining, Parameters in welding and their control, Analysis of 2D,3D heat flow in welds. 
Modern welding process like EBW, LBW, Diffusion bonding, Ultrasonic welding etc. Pulsed current welding processes. Welding of Ceramics, Plastics, Composites. 

Weldment design for Pressure vessels, Offshore structures and Subma-rine Pipe lines, Heavy structures. 

Failure of welds, NDT of welds, Inspection codes for weldments 

;;Schwartz, M.M., Metal Joining Manual, McGraw Hill, NY, 1979. 
Connur, L.P., Welding Handbook, Vol 1 & 2, American Welding Society, 1989, 1990. 
Houldcraft, P.T., Welding Process Technology, Cambridge Univ Press, 1985. 
American Soc. for Boiler & Pressure Vessels Code, Mech Engineers, ASME Publ., New York, 1989. 
American Soc. for Metals, Metals Handbook, 9th ed., Vol 6, Welding and Brazing, ASM, Metals Park, Ohio, 1989. ;;
GS 801;The Global framework The Earth"s crust and Upper mantle-seismic, magnetic and gravity studies. 
Heat and thermal properties-measurement of terrestial heat flow, sources of heat and temperature distribution in the earth. 

Earthquake-characteristics, effects and distribution. 

Sea floor spreading and Plate tectonics-tectonic activity at plate margins within plates. Tectonic history of rifts, hot-spots, aseismic ridges. Plate movement, causes of plate tectonics paleodynamics. 

;;P.J. Smith, Topics in Geophysics, The Open University Press, 1973 
P.J. Wyllie, The dynamic earth, Wiley, New York, 1971 
Readings in Earth Sciences, The Scientific American. 
;;
GS 802;Modern geomorphology: Salient aspects; techniques of geomorphic analysis landforms, slopes, drainage and processes; interpreation of landscapes. 
Geomorphic applications: in integrated surveys, in geological mapping in prospecting for economic minerals, in river valley projects, in environmental studies, in surface and sub-surface hydrology, in coastline development, in land-use, studies in pedoecology, in military intelligence. 
;;Subramanyan, V (con), Lecture Notes for Short Courses on Techniques of Geomorphic Application, Dept. Earth Sciences, IIT, Bombay, 1983 
Hails, J.R. Ed. Applied Geomorphology and Engineering, Dowden, Hutchinson and Ross, Stroudsburg, 1976 
Coats, D.R. Ed. Environmental Geomorphology and Landscape Conservation, Vols.II and III Stroudsburg, 1973. 
;;
GS 803;Geological applications ofhigh temperature reaction calorimeter. 
Thermodynamic functions at room temperature, Effect of pressure and temperature. Activity relations of crystalline solutions, Chemical mixing of multi-component solutions,Thermodynamics of chemical equilibria, fugacity and activity of species. Composition and thermodynamics of metamorphic solutions, silicate melts and aqueous solution, Thermodynamics of traceelement distribution. Ore solution chemistry. 

;;D.G. Fraser, Thermodynamics in Geology Greenwood,Thermodynamics-Short course. 
;;
ME 637;Product cycle, Manufacturing functions, Types of automation, Degree of automation, Technical, economic and human factors in automation, Technologies - Mechanical, Electrical, Hydraulic, Pneumatic, Electronic, Hybrid systems, Comparative evaluation. 
Development of small automation systems using mechanical devices, Basics of pneumatics, Synthesis of circuits, Basics of hydraulic systems, Synthesis of hydraulic circuits, Elements used for electrical circuits, Synthesis, Circuit optimization techniques. 

Illustrative examples of the above types of systems as well as hybrid systems used for automation of working cycles of machines, Material Handling, Inspection and Assembly etc. 

Industrial logic control systems Logic diagraming, Programmable controllers, Applications, Designing for automation, Cost-benefit analysis. 

;;Gavrilov, A.N., Automation and Mechanization of Production Processes in Instrument Industry, Pergaman Press, Oxford, 1967. 
Pippengerm, G., Industrial Hydraulics, MGH, New York, 1979. 
Kay, F., Pneumatics for Industry, The Machining Publ. Co., London, 1959. 
Asphal Ray, Robots and Manufacturing Automation, John Wiley, New York, 1985. 
Boothroyd, G. and Poli, C., Automatic Assembly, Marcel Dekkar, New York, 1982. 

;;
GS 804;Review of univariate and multi variate statistical methods. Univariate times series analysis in time domain for stationary and non-stationary processes. Methods of time domain forecasting for one or multiple steps. Superposition of two or more stochastic processes in inference. 
Multivariate time series analysis in time domain for stationary and non-stationary processes. Multivariate forecasting for one-or more steps. 

;;W.W. Cooley and P.R. Lohnes. Introduction to Multivariate Data Analysis, Wiley, 1971. 
E.S. Keeping, Introduction to Statistical Inference, Van, Nostrand, 1962. 
;;
ME 638;Sheet metal production, Mechanical properties and their assessment, Forming Limit Diagram(FLD), Anisotropic yield criteria, Stress and strain paths. 
Sheet metal forming processes: Shearing, Punching/ Blanking, Bending, Deep drawing, Pre and post treatment of sheet metal parts. 

Process modeling & analysis of typical processes, Scope of CAD/CAM in sheet metal forming, Numerical Analysis of forming processes. 

Varieties of sheet metal - Ferrous and Non ferrous. 

Forming Machines: Conventional and Advanced - CNC shears, Press brakes, Turret punching press etc., Sheet handling equipment. 

Tool design & Design of inspection fixtures, Component handling. Super plastic forming. 

;;American Soc. for Metals, Metals Handbook, 10th Edition, Vol 15, on Metal Forming, ASM, Metals Park, Ohio, 1989. 
David, A., Smith (Editor), Die Design Handbook, SME Publications, Michigan, 1990. 
Polukhin, P., & Others, Rolling Mill Practice, Mir Publishers, Moscow, 1960. 
Lange, K., Handbook of Metal Forming, McGraw Hill, 1985. 
Eary, D.F., and Reed, E.A., Techniques of Pressworking Sheet metal and Engineering Approach to Die Design, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1974. 
;;
GS 805;Fractional crystallization and mixing processes. Partial melting of mantle and crustal rocks. Tectonic environment of volcanic rocks in relation to their geochemistry. Origin of granulites and charnockites, Geothermobarometry of metamorphic assemblages. 
Experimental petrology and mineralogy- instrumentation, scope and some significant results. 

Sedimetary Petrology: Sedimentation process model, concepts of size, shape, their measurement, processing and statistical inference. 

Depositional enviroments and analysis by multivariate methods. Models for clastic and carbonate sedimentation. Basin development.
;;Cox, K.G. Bell, J.D. and Pankkhurst, R.J., The interpretation of igneous rocks, George Allen & Unwin 1983 
Griffiths, J.C. Methods of Analysis of Sediments, McGraw Hill, 1967 
Petijohn, F.J. Potter, S. Sands and Sandstone, Springer 1972. 
;;
GS 807;Geochemistry of the Solid Earth. Fluids in the earth"s crust. 
Geochemistry of solid-liquid-gas interphases. Geochemistry of hydrothermal fluids. Geochemical environments, Geochemistry of magnetic, metamorphic and sedimentary processes and deposits. 

Geochemistry of hydrosphere, biosphere and atmosphere. Environmental geochemistry, Isotope geochemistry. 

;;Fyfe, W.S., Fluids in earth"s crust, Elsevier. 
Barnes, H.L., Geochemistry of hydrothermal ore deposits-John Wiley 
Krauskopf, K.B. Introduction to Geochemistry, McGraw Hill. 
;;
GS 808;Advanced techniques in optional methods of mineralogical studies. 
Interpretation of petrochemical data. Structural analysis. Methods in experimental petrology. Chemical and spectrochemical methods in geological analysis, Radiation techniques. Computer applications in geology. 

;;Faure, G., Isotope Geology, John Wiley & Sons N.Y., 1986 
Allegre, C.J. and Hart S.R., Trace Elements in igneous petrology, Elsevier, 1979 
Naidu, P.R.J., 4 axes universal stage,, Commercial Printing and Publishing House Madras-1 
Brenner, I.B., Application of ICP in geology, Elsevier, 1989. 
;;
GS 810;Sedimentary environments and relations to time and stratigraphy; Deterministric models in stratigraphy, stochastic models. Markov chains. Renewal and semi-Markov processs. Stationary stochastic processes and spectral analysis. Stratigraphic trends, sedimentary cycles and cyclicity. Quantitative lithostratigraphic matching and correlation. Facies problems of areal facies mapping. Modelling and simulation of geologic profiles. ;;W.Schwarzacher, Sedimentation Models and Quatitative Stratigraphy: Elsevier Publ. Co. Amsterdam, 1975 
W.C. Krumbein & L.L. Sloss, Stratigraphy and Sedimentation, WH Freeman, San Francisco, 1963. 
;;
ME 642;Influence of tooling on quality and productivity: Requirements of tooling for flexible small lot production with constraints on lead time. 
Jigs and Fixtures: Locating elements and methods, Principles of clamping, Clamping elements and methods, Indexing devices, Tool guiding and cutter setting concepts, Development of housing, Design of jigs, fixtures for milling, boring etc. 

Assembly and Inspection fixtures , Welding fixtures. Tooling for CNC: Development of modular fixtures, Innovative concepts like tooling for fragile parts, Plastics for tooling etc. 

Design of special cutting tools: Form tools for turning and milling, Hobbing and shaping for generating special forms. 

Manufacture and maintenance of tools: Cost estimation and cost benefit analysis, Tool Reconditioning, SMTC analysis. 

Computer applications in tool design and drafting. 

;;Donaldson, Lecain & Goold, Tool Design, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1976. 
Wilson, F.W., Tool Engineers Handbook, McGraw Hill, New York, 1968. 
Joshi, P.H., Jigs and Fixtures, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1988. 
Hoffman, E.G., Fundamentals of tool design, S.M.E., Michigan, 1984. 
Korskov, V., Fundamentals of Fixtures Design, Mir Publishers, Moscow, 1989. 
;;
GS 812;Early history of rock magnetism/Palaeomagnetism, Domains-SD, MD, SP, Curie temperatures; Magnetic mineralogy, Types of magnetisation-TRM, DRM, stability of magnetisation, Rock magnetic techniques sampling and measurement of remanence, Susceptibility, hysteresis, and demagnetisation. Statistical technique; Magnetic fabric, rock Magnetism and global tectonics. Geomagnetic applications. Polarity reversals, geological applications. Magnetic anomalies and sea floor spreading model. Application to mineral exploration and mineral industry-Palaeomagnetic dating of mineralization, magnetostratigraphy, redox chemical remanence as a indicator of sulphides beneath volcanics, geothermometry, zoning in ore bodies, magnetic analysis for ore guides and marine minerals, handling and treatment of ore minerals, case histories. ;;P.M.S., Blackett, Lecture on Rock Magnetism (The Weizmann Science Press of Israel) 1956 
D.M. Tarling, Principles and Applications of Palaeomagnetism, (Chapman and Hall, London, 1971) 
N.W. Mc Elhinney, Palaeomagnetism and Plate Tectonics, (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1973) 
Reports of Institute of Earth Resources CSIRO Australia, 1980. ;;
ES 601;General Chemistry, Environmental Chemistry of Water, Water Pollution, Water Treatment, Geochemistry, Soil Chemistry, Atmospheric Chemistry, Inorganic and Organic air Pollutants, Chemistry of Hazardous substances, Toxicological Chemistry. 
Basic concepts of instrumental methods of pollutant analysis such as Ion Selective Electrode, Atomic Absorption Spectrometry, Flame Photometry, Chromatography, Mercury Analyser, Total Organic Carbon Analyser. 

;;S.E. Manahan: Fundamentals of Environmental Chemistry, Lewis Publisher, 1993. 
C.N. Sawyer and P.L. McCarty: Chemistry for Environmental Engineering, McGraw Hill Book Co., 1978. 
W.Stumm and J.J. Morgan: Aquatic Chemistry, Wiley- Interscience, 1971. 
J.H. Seinfeld: Air Pollution, McGraw Hill Book Co., 1986. 
H.H. Willard, L.L. Merrit and J.A. Dean: Instrumental Methods of Analysis, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1976. ;;
ME 651; Continuum concept, control volume equations, Ideal fluid flow and hydraulic singularities, Navier-stokes equations, and their use. 
Concept of compressible flow, one dimensional isentropic flow, normal shock, flow with-friction, heat transfer, boundary-Layer theory and applications. 

;;J.M. Robertson, Hydrodynamics in Theory and Applications, Prentice Hall, 1965. 
S.M. Yahya, Fundamentals of Compressible Flow, Wiley Eastern Limited, 1982. 
A.H. Shapiro, The Dynamics and Thermodynamics of Compressible Fluid Flow, Ronald, 1953. 
H. Schlichting, Boundary Layer Theory McGraw-Hill, 1979. 
;;
ES 603;Definition, Classification and Examples of Environmental Systems & Models, System Simulation. 
Introduction to air quality models; Air pollution meteorology; Atmospheric turbulence; Gaussian Plume model and Modifications; Simulation of special meteorological and topographic conditions; Urban Diffusion Models,Gradient Transport Models, Model Calibration and Validation. Sensitivity Analysis, Applications, Models for Climatic change; Introduction to river, estuarine and lake hydrodynamics, Dissolved Oxygen Models; Eutrophication and Nutrient - phytoplankton models, temperature models, prediction of fate of organisms and toxic substances. Models for management applications.
;;R.V. Thomann and J.A. Muller: Principles of Surface Water Quality Modelling and Control, Harper International Edition, N.D., 1987. 
G.T.Orlab (Ed): Mathematical Modelling of Water Quality Streams Lakes and Reservoir, Int. Inst. for Applied Systems Analysis, 1983. 
J.H. Seinfeld: Air Pollution McGraw Hill, 1986. 
;;
ES 616; Principles and sources of energy conversion methods: Thermal, nuclear, hydro, solar. An introduction to fuels, combustion fundamentals, thermodynamics of combustion rates & properties of combustion products; Formation of pollutants, measurement and controls; Fundamentals of engine processes, sources of emissions from automobiles, effect of operating and design parameters on emission, recent trends in design of non-polluting power units, control methods, exhaust reactor problems and prospects; Exhaust emission test, procedures, standards and legislation; Combustion in Stationary sources, Power Production, Cogeneration. 
Alternative energy sources utilisation, economics, environmental impacts, and management. 

;;A.M. Kanury: Introduction to Combustion Phenomena, Gordon and Beach Science Publishers, 1975. 
E.Starkman: Combustion Generated Air Pollution, Plenum Press, 1971. 
G.S. Springer and D.J.Patterson: Engine Emissions, Pollutant Formation and Measurement, Plenum Press, 1973. 
J.M. Fowler, Energy and the Environment, McGraw Hill, 1975. ;;
ES 626;Introduction to Monitoring and Network, Design Criteria and Models for Site Selection, Sampling and Analytical Schedules, BIS Methods. 
Principles and Techniques of Sampling for ambient air and stack effluents, Meteorological monitoring and instrumentation, Noise Pollution Monitoring, Case Studies. 

Principles and techniques of sampling for water and wastewater, sampling equipments, sample collection, preservation and handling, Case Studies. 

Statistical Analysis and Interpretation of Monitoring Data, Descriptive Statistics, Frequency Analysis, Averaging Times, Cycles and Trends, Sample Size Determination, Quality Assurance, Indices, Time Series Analysis, Factor analysis, Data processing and Management, Practical Applications.
;;K.E. Noll and T.L. Miller: Air Monitoring Survey Designs, Ann Arbor Science, 1977. 
ISI: 5182 (Parts 1-14). 
R.C. Ward, J.C. Loftis and G.B. McBride: Design of Water Qualify Monitoring Systems, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1990. 
Manual for Statistical Analysis and Interpretation of Water Quality Data, CPCB, 1987. 
L.H. Keith, Principles of Environmental Sampling, ACS Professional Reference, American Chemical Society, 1988. 
;;
ES 627;Air Quality Monitoring : Ambient monitoring, Gases, Suspended particulate matter and its characterization, Source Monitoring, Stack Monitoring, Exhaust measurement. 
Noise pollution monitoring. Meteorological data collection and analysis. 

Water Quality monitoring : Mineral analysis, Demand analysis, Nutrient analyses, Metal analysis, Organic analysis. 

Microbiological Examination : Rapid detection method. Heterotrophic plate count. Multiple tube fermentation technique, Membrane filter technique. 

;;L.S.Clesceri, A.E.Greenberg and R.R. Trussell : Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, APHA Publishing, 17th Edn, 1989. 
H.H.Ramp and H.Krist: Laboratory Manual for the Examination of Water, Wastewater and Soil, VCH Publishers, 1988. 
I.S.Codes : IS 5182,IS 11255,IS 8829,IS 3028. 
;;
ES 628;Equalization: Volume requirement and effect on BOD mass loading rate, Coagulation. 
Flocculation: Coagulation dose and aggregation Kinetics, Sedimentation: Settling analysis, Filtration: Head loss, Chlorination: Water and Wastewater, Adsorption: Equilibria and Kinetics, Aeration, Ion Exchange Activated Sludge: Substrate utilisation rate, Sludge growth rate, Oxygen uptake rate and kinetics. 

;;W.J. Weber :Physicochemical Processes for water Quality Control, John Wiley and Sons., 1972. 
G. Tchobanoglous and F.G. Buston :Wastewater Engineering Treatment, Disposal and Reuse, McGraw Hill Inc., 1991. 
L.G. Rich: Unit Processes of Sanitary Engineering, Wiley, 1963. 
;;
ES 629;Overview of environmental systems Water quality standards and water purification processes Nature of sanitary and industrial wastewaters, Primary secondary and advanced treatment methodologies and water reclamation. 
Air quality standards, classification of atmospheric pollutants and systems for control of air pollution from industries. Noise Pollution and Control. 

Principles of solid and hazardous waste treatment Potentials for resource and energy recovery 

;;H.S. Peavy,D.R.Rowe, G.Tchobanoglous: Environmental Engineering, McGraw-Hill, 1985. 
M.L.Davis and D.A. Cornwell: Introduction to Environmental Engineering, McGraw Hill, 1991.;;
ES 630;Methodology of environmental management - Review of National and International protocols. 
Environmental quality criteria and standards - Significant sources of water and air pollution and indices of environmental quality - Survey and hot spot identification, preparation of management plan - Case studies of major river basin and metropolitan air quality improvement plans. 

Noise control Significance of solid and hazardous wastes, pesticide residuals and banned chemicals. 

Economic evaluation of environmental management programmes - Economic incentives and disincentives as instruments for environmental management - Tax, subsidies,fee,tradable permits. 

Policies on Management of Forests, Coastal Zones and Land use planning. 

;;A. Rosencranz, S. Divan, M.L. Noble: Environmental law and policy in India - Cases, Materials and Statutes, Tripathi Pvt. Ltd., Bombay 1992. 
S. Musharraf: Legal aspects of Environmental Pollution and its management, C.B.S. Publishers, Delhi 1992. 
W.J.Banmol and W.E. Dates: The Theory of Environmental Policy - Cambridge University Press, 1988. 
;;
ES 631;Introduction to Urban or Metropolitan Regional Planning, Issues related to Water Supply, Wastewater Collection, Storm Water and Generation of Solid Wastes, Service levels, Water Demand Forecasting ; Source management, Water treatment and Distribution Systems, Network Design. 
Municipal wastewater collection, conveyance, treatment storm water management. 

Computer packages for design of sewerage and storm water systems. 

Principles of Solid Waste Collection, treatment and disposal, recovery and recycle. 
;;N.J. McGhee: Water Supply and Sewerage, McGraw Hill Inc.,1991 
B. Tchobanoglous and F.G. Buston: Wastewater Engineering, Treatment, Disposal and Reuse, McGraw Hill 1991. 
;;
ES 633;Industrial wastewater characterisation, Treatability studies - Segregation, battery limit treatment- Pretreatment - standards. 
Control of pollutants - Coagulation, sedimentation, thickening, precipitation, biological oxidation, biomethanation, adsorption, ion exchange, ,membrane separation, chemical oxidation, sludge dewatering and disposal methods. 

Control of water pollution from organic chemicals, refinery, petrochemical, distillery, pulp and paper, textile, fertilizer, tanneries, food and pharmaceutical industries, coke ovens and steel plants. 

;;W.W. Eckenfelder: Industrial pollution control, McGraw Hill Int.Edition, 1990. 
Metcalf and Eddy: Wastewater Engineering - Treatment, Disposal and Reuse, Inc. Third Edition McGraw - Hill, 1991. 
Central Pollution Control Board, India : Comprehensive Industry Document Series : 
;;
ES 638;Air quality and emission standards. 
Sources and classification of air pollutants Nature and characteristics of gaseous and particulate pollutants. 

Control of Gaseous emissions by absorption, adsorption, condensation, chemical transformation and combustion methods. 

Control of particulate emissions by mechanical collectors, bag filter, electrostatic precipitators and wet scrubbers. 

Source and control of air pollution from selected industries - fertilizer, cement, paper, refinery, mineral and metallurgical processes etc. 

Air Pollution Control system. 
;;H.E. Hesketh: Air Pollution Control Second Edition, Ann Arbor Science, 1992. 
S.Calvert and H.M. Englund: Handbook of Air Pollution Engineering, John Wiley, 1984. 
A.J. Buonicore and W.T. Davis: Air Pollution Engineering Manual, Van Nostrand, 1993. 
M.N. Rao and H.V.N. Rao: Air Pollution, Tata McGraw - Hill, 1989. 
;;
ME 653; Basic concepts, B.L. Parameters, B.L. on flat plate, stokes first and second problems, Hiemenz flow, flow near rotating disc. Von-Karman Momentum Equation. 
General Properties of B.L. equations, momentum and energy B.L. Equations. Exact solution of two dimensional methods. Theory of stability. Perturbation methods, OrrSomerfield equation, general properties of disturbance equations. Tollmien s method of solution. 

Thermal B.L. in Laminar flow. Theory of similarity in heat transfer and exact solutions. Turbulence, correlation coefficient. 

;;H. Schlichting, Boundary Layer Theory, McGraw Hill , 1979. 
J.C. Hinze, Turbulence - An introduction to its Mechanism and Theory, McGraw-Hill, 1975. 
G.K. Batchelor, Introduction to Fluid Dynamics, Cambridge University, 1967. 
;;
ES 640;Microbial metabolism - kinetics of bacterial growth and substrate utilization and their application to biological treatment. Aerobic and anaerobic suspended and attached growth systems - reactor configurations, process analysis, design and control. 
Biotechnology in degrading recalcitrant substances - role of enzymes, genetic adaptive responses, aerobic degradation of chlorinated hydrocarbons - dehalogenation mechanisms, microbial treatment of hazardous waste - Immobilized cells, enzymes - applications in wastewater treatment. 

;;Metcalf and Eddy: Wastewater Engineering - Treatment, disposal and reuse, Third Edition, McGraw Hill 1991. 
S.J. Arceivala: Wastewater Treatment and Disposal, Marcel Dekker, 1981. 
N.F. Grey: Activated Sludge Process - Theory and Practice, Oxford University Press, 1990. 
N.F. Grey: Biology of Wastewater Treatment, Oxford University Press, 1989. 
N.J. Horan: Biological Wastewater Treatment Systems - Theory and Operation, John Wiley, 1991.;;
BM 603;Introduction to overall organization of human body. Basic and engineering aspects of the following : The master and vegetative tissues, organs systems, nervous system, musculo-skeletal system, endocrine system and body metabolism, gastro intestinal system, respiratory system and spirometers, cardiovascular system, blood and body fluids, reproductive system, blood and body fluids, reproductive system, hepato-biliary system, kidney and excretory system, basic physiologic principles, metabolism, immunity and allergy, physiology museum hematology experiments. ;;1. W.F. Ganong, Medical physiology, 12 Marusen Asian end. Singapore, 1985. 
2. C.C. Chatterjee, Human physiology, Med. Allied Agency, Calcutta, 1985. 
3. S. Wright, Applied Physiology, Oxford, 1984. 
4. J. H. Brown (ed.) Engineering principles in physiology Acad. Press, New York. 
;;
ME 655;General classification: Equations of work transfer for rotodynamic type machinery; operation, performance and similarity laws of rotodynamic type of pump, fan, blower and compressor; cavitation in pump; hydraulic design of centrifugal type pump and blower. 
Positive displacement type and jet pump type machinery: Impulse type and reaction type hydroturbines; operation, performance, similarity laws, governing, runaway speed; hydraulic design of impulse type and radial flow type hydroturbines. 

;;Nagaratnam, S., Fluid Machines and Systems, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Co., 1971. 
Cherkassky, V.M., Pumps, Fans, Compressors MIR Publishers, 1977. 
Matley, J., Fluid Movers: Pumps, Compressors, Fans and Blowers, McGraw Hill Publication, 1979. 
Krivchenko, G.I., Hydraulic Machines: Turbines and Pumps, MIR Publishers, 1986. 
;;
BM 601;Ordinary differential equations of the 1st order, exactness and integrating factors, variation of parameters. Ordinary linear differential equations of n-th order, solution of homogeneous and nonhomogeneous equations, operator method, methods of undetermined coefficients and variation of parameters. Sequence and series, power series methods for linear ordinary differential equations. 
Laplace transform and its applications. Fourier series and Fourier transform and applications in biomedical engineering. Partial differential equations : models in physiology, introduction to solution techniques such as variable separation, product method and Laplace Transform method. 
;;1. G. Eason, C.W. Coles, G. Gittinby - Mathematics and Statistics for the Biosciences. Ellis Horwood, 1980. 
2. J.G. Defares, I.N. Sneddon - The Mathematics of medicine and Biology. North Holland, 1971. 
3. E. Kreyszig - Advanced Engineering Mathematics. (5th edition) Wiley Eastern, 1991. 
;;
AE 396;;;;;
MG 772;;;;;
AE 495;;;;;
CL 497;;;;;
CE 616; ;;;;
CE 631;;;;;
CE 633;;;;;
CE 637;;;;;
CE 643; ;;;;
AES601;;;;;
AE 456; Introduction to design, design process; problem formulation in design, design variables and constraints, Concepts in optimization, local and global optima, equality and inequality constraints and constrained optimization. Lagrange multipliers, Linear programming, Non-linear programming,Post optimality analysis, Examples of design optimization. ;Nil;

Jabir S.Arora, Introduction to Optimum Design, McGraw-Hill, 1989.
Kalyanmoy Deb, Optimisation for Engineering Design - Algorithms & Examples, Prentice Hall of India, 1995. ;;
ME 658;Introduction to control system. Types of control system and their utility. Hydraulic power generation and transmission, valve control pressure flow relationship for hydraulic valves, valve configurations and constructions, steady state operating forces, transient forces and valve instability. Circuit design. Pneumatic valves. Hydraulic and pneumatic drives. Introduction to fluidic devices and sensors, lumped and distributed parameter fluid systems. 
Fluid mechanics of jets, wall attachment and vortex devices. Pure fluidic analog amplifiers. Analog signal control techniques. Design of pure fluid digital elements. 

;;J.F. Blackburn, G. Rechthof, J.L. Shearer, Fluid Power Control MIT, 1960. 
B.W. Anderson, The Analysis and Design of Pneumatic Systems, Wiley, 1967. 
K. Foster, G. Parker, Fluidic Components and Circuits, Wiley, 1970. 
A.B. Goodwin, Fluid Power Systems, Macmillan, 1976. 
;;
BM 609;Principles of physiological measurement. Laboratory instruments : electrodes, amplifiers, stimulators. Types of transducers. Methods of recording and analysis of physiological phenomena in laboratory animals. Bioelectric recording : the nerve action potential. The force transducer and its characterization. Force generation and electrical activity in muscles. The electrocardiogram : recording analysis. Data collection and processing, including digital and analogue conversions. ;;1. P. Ruch and R. Patton. Physiology and Biophysics. Academic press, New York, 1965. 
2. B. Katz, Nerve, muscle and synapse. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1966. 
3. C.A. Keele, E. Neil, & N. Joles (Eds). Samson Wright"s Applied Physiology, 13th Edition. Oxford University Press, New Delhi, 1982. 
4. E.O. Doebelin. Measurement systems : application and design. McGraw-Hill, 1975. 
5. J.G. Webster, Medical Instrumentation application and design. Houghton-Mifflin, Boston, 1987. 
;;
BM 611;Review of radiophysics in medicine. Introduction to rontgen rays, tomography. C.T. scan, NMR techniques. Radio isotopes in Biology and medicine, Irradiation induced destruction and recovery processes in cells. Safety handling of isotopes. Application of radioisotopes and lasers in measurements of physiological parameters in biomedicine. ;;1. A. C. Damask, Medical physics volume No. 1 Academic Press, 1978. 
2. Oxford Text Book of Medicine, 1984-1986. 
;;
BM 613;Man machine environment system, anthropometry, neuromuscular system, muscular contraction, human energy expenditure, energy balance, joint motion study, physiological fatigue, thermal environment. 
;;1. E. J. McCormick, Human factors in Engineering and Design, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1976. 
2. O.P. Astrand, R. Kaare, Text book of Work physiology, New York, McGraw-Hill, 1970. 
3. W.T. Singleton, The body at work: Biological Ergonomics. Cambridge Univ. Press, 1982. 
4. E.R. Tichauer, The Biomechanical basis of Ergonomics. Wiley, New York, 1978. 
5. R. D. Huchingson, New horizons for human factors design, McGraw-Hill , New York, 1981.;;
BM 615;Concepts of stress & strain and their relationship. Rheology and rheological equations. Definition of biorheology, its connection with physics and biology. Need for biorheology and rheological concepts. 
Haemorheology definition and clinical aspects. Haemodynamics, blood viscosity factors, cardiovascular haemorheology. Rheology of body fluids. Application of rheology in diagnosis, treatment and fundamental understanding of diseases. Blood and plasma viscosity determination (expt.) 

;;1. L. Dintenfass, Rheology of blood in diagnostic and preventive Medicine, Butterworth London, 1976. 
2. Y.C. Fung, Biomechanics, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1981. 
3. S. Oka, Cardiovascular Haemorheology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1981. 
;;
BM 617;Structure and property relationships in metals, ceramics and polymers; interactions of these materials with human body. Influence of microstructure and environment on fatigue and fracture of materials. 
Composite materials concepts and applications; whiskers and fibres medical applications such as structures, orthopedic implants, artificial organs, dental materials etc. Implementation problems - inflammation, rejection, corrosion, structure failure. 

;;1. J. B. Park, Biomaterials : An introduction 1970. 
2. L. Hench. and E.G. Erhridge, Biomaterials An interfacila approach, 1982. ;;
BM 619;Introduction to the following : Wave nature of light, polarisation property of light waves, reflection, refraction, scattering and absorption. Interference, diffraction and coherence. Definitions of spontaneous emission, stimulated emission and absorption and lasers. 
Special properties of laser radiation. Examples of some laser systems for biomedical applications. 

Principles of laser applications in medicine and bioilogy. Fundamentals of photomedicine and photobiology, photodematology, photodynamic therapy and tumous with lasers. Laser therapy of lesions and ulcers. 

;;1. O"Shea, Callen and Rhodes, Introduction to lasers and their applications., Addison-Willy, 1977. 
2. R. Pratesi and C.A. Sacchi, Lasers in photomedicine and photobiology, Springer-VErlag, 1980. 
3. L. Goldmann, Biomedical aspects of the laser, Springer-Verlag, 1976, H.K. Koebner, Laser in medicine, John Wiley and Sons, 1980. 
;;
BM 697;The course contents will be outlined at the beginning of the semester by the faculty member(s) offering it. More than one Special Topics courses may be run concurrently with the same course number. ;;Texts, monographs and journals will be suggested by the concerned faculty members. 
;;
BM 698;The course contents will be outlined at the beginning of the semester by the faculty member(s) offering it. More than one Special Topics courses may be run concurrently with the same course number. ;;Texts, monographs and journals will be suggested by the concerned faculty members. 
;;
BM 602;The scope of statistics in biomedical data analysis. Statistical design of experiments for clinical and laboratory data; random allocation, methods of allocation without random numbers. Volunteered bias. Cross over designs. Selection and distribution of experimental unit. Case control analysis. Applications of probability and standard distributions : Estimation, standard error and confidence interval. 
Testing of hypotehses. Correlation and Regression. Analysis of Variance. Factor analysis. Statistical method oriented and problem oriented illustrations for computer aided inferencing. 

;;1. Martin Bland - An Introduction to Medical Statistics. Oxford Univ. Press, 1987. 
2. G. Eason, C.W. Coles, G. Gittinby - Mathematics and Statistics for the Biosciences. Ellis Horwood, 1980. 
3. O. Kempthrone - Design and Analysis of experiments. Wiley Eastern, 1967. 
4. A. Agresti - Analysis of categorical data. John Wiley, NY, 1990. 
;;
BM 604; The Cell : Structure of a cell, tissues, organs. Systems : Different systems of body and their functions. The Blood: Blood composition, physical and physiological properties,the red cells, the white cells. 
The structure of nervous tissues, neuro-muscular transmission, receptors and their functions, neuronal mechanisms and information processing, spinal cord, reflexes, posture and equilibrium, the cerebral cortex and its intellectual functions, the cerebellum. 

Special senses : vision and hearing. Peripheral circulation and its control, cardiac output and its regulation, dynamics of heart, Pulmonary circulation, gas exchange, respiratory volumes,lung compliances, control of respiration.Renal circulation, acid-base and water balance, glomerular and tubular functions. Physiology museum, hematology experiments. 
;size=20;1. Herbert Best Charles and B. Norman Taylor, The physiological basis of Medical practice, William & Wilkins, Baltimore, 1985. 
2. C. A. Keele and Eric Neil, Samson Wright"s Applied physiology; ELBS, London, 1984. 
4. S. West. Edward. R. Todd Wilbert. S. Mason 07 3 Howard. J. T. Van Bruggen, Text book of Biochemistry, the Macmillan Co.,1976. 
5. A. C. Guyton, Text book of Medical Physiology, Saunder, Philadelphia, 1986. 
;;
BM 612;Role of computers in health care and clinical decisions, information system development, clinical data bases, computer-based patient records or diagnosis, use of standard packages, such as dBASE III, spreadsheets and their applications. Introduction to intelligent systems. patterns and recognition, heuristics in clinical inferencing, knowledge organisation and engineering, expert systems in medicine. Development of computer-based systems using knowledge engineering tools. ;;1. E. A. Shortlife, Computer based decision Making in medicine:MYCIN, American Elsevier, 1976. 
2. P. Szolovits, (ed) Artificial intelligence in medicine: West view press, Boulder, Colorado, 1982. 
3. A. E. Patrick, Decision making in medicine: Methods and application, Florida, CRC Press, 1979. 
4. A. E. Feigenbaum and A. Barr (ed) Hand book of Artificial intelligence, Vol. I. (1981), Vol. 11 (1982), Kanimann. Inc. 07 
5. P. R. Cohen and Felgerbaum E. A. (ed): Handbook of Artificial intelligence. Vol. III (1982); Kani mann Inc. 
;;
BM 616;The emphasis of this course is on the analysis and design of medical instruments. The topics include Bioelectric signals and electrodes. 
Acquisition and analysis of ECG, EMG, EEG signals. Impedance plethysmograph. Application of ultrasonics in medicine. Biotelemetry and electrical safety. Cardiac and respiratory measurements. 

Pacemakers and defibrillator. Patient safety. 

;;1. R. S. Khandpur, Handbook of Biomedical instrumentation. Tata McGraw-Hill, 1987. 
2. J. G. Webster, Biomedical instrumentation, Application and design. ;;
BM 618;Introduction to fluid mechanics, fluid properties, basics laws governing conservation of mass, momentum and energy, laminar flow, Couette flow and Hagen-Poiseuille equation, turbulent flow. Flow dynamical study of circulatory system. Heart and blood vessels, anatomy and physiological considerations. Body fluids in motions. Flow of Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids in rigid tubes. Flexible tubes collapsible tubes. Blood flow through arteries and veins. Holt and Conrad"s experimental investigations. Kinetic energy. flow, pressure flow relations in vascular beds, heart beat, cardiac cycle, valvular dysfunctions, components and functions of arterial system; Capillaries, venous system, lymphatic. Blood pressure, physiological factors controlling blood pressure. Coronary circulation. Heart failure. ;;1. J.F. Green, Fundamental cardiovascular and pulmonary physiology, Philadelphia, Lea and Febiger, 1982. 
2. Wright S. Samson, Applied physiology, Oxford, 1984. 
3. T.C. Ruch, H.D. Patton, Physiology and Biophysics, W.B. Saunder compnay, 1966. 
4. Abrahim Noordegraff - Cardiovascular system dynamics, Academic press Inc. London, 1978.;;
BM 620;Introduction to the lymphatic and cardiovascular systems. Interstitial fluid dynamics, edema and pulmonary fluid. Review of applications of biocompatible synthetic membranes in the development of artificial internal organs like heart-lung, kidney, pancreas etc. Transport operations through membranes under gradients of osmosis, dialysis, ultrafiltration (UF), reverse osmosis (RO) and electrodialysis (ED). Exposure to new techniques for miniaturization and development of wearable artificial organs based on UF/RO/ED and microencapsulated adsorbent systems. Identification of engineering design parameters in artificial organs development. ;;1. D. O. Cooney, Biomedical engineering principles volume 1, 2.New York Harcel Dekker. 
2. E.N. Lightfoot, Transport phenomena in Living systems. NIT press, 1978. 
3. C. H. Best & N.B. Taylor, The physiological basis of medical practice, William & Wikins, Baltimore, 1985. 
;;
BM 622;Modelling of physiological systems. Black-box models versus detailed physical models. Review of control system theory. Digital techniques in analysis and modelling. Frequency domain techniques - Discrete Fourier transforms, spectral analysis, system identification. 
Numerical simulation techniques in modelling. Open loop systems - transfer functions of sensory receptors, eye movement control system models. Closed loop control systems - neuromuscular control and reflexes, regulation of the coronary circulation. Stability criteria for closed leep systems. Current techniques in physiological signal analysis and systems modelling. 

;;1. A. Oppenheim, A. Willsky, and I. Yong (1981) signals and systems. Prentice-Hall. 
2. T.S. Bahill (1983) Bioengineering, Prentice-Hall. 
3. J.H.U. Brown and D.S. Gann (1973) - Engineering Principles in Physiology. Academic Press. 
;;
BM 624;The passive and active electrical properties of excitable cells. 
Cellular biopotentials and currents and the techniques for recording them. 

The resting membrane potential and action potential : origins; models and theories of explanation. The Hodgkin-Huxley model of the action potential Membrane ionic pumps and exchange processes. Physiological and clinical significance. 

Electrophysiology of neuroeffector transmission. Prejunctional and post junctional electrical events. Transmission processes in skeletal, smooth and cardiac muscle, and synapses. Time courses of transmitter-activated postjunctional membrane potentials and currents. 

Electrophysiology of membrane ionic channels and neurotransmitter receptors. Modification of bioelectric activity using drugs.
;;1. R. Barr & R. L. Plonsey, Bioelectricity: quantitative approach. Plenum Press, 1988. 
2. D. J. Aidley, The physiology of excitable cells, 3rd Edn. Cambridge University Press, 1989. 
3. P. Ruch & R. Patton, Physiology and biophysics. Academic Press, 1965. 
4. B. Katz. Nerve, muscle and synapse. McGraw-Hill, 1966. 
5. E. Kandel & K. Schwartz,, Principles of Neuroscuence, 2nd Edn. Elsevier, New York, 1986. 
6. C. A. Keele, E. Neil & N. Joels (Eds) Samson-Wright"s applied physiology. 13th Edn, Oxford University Press, 1982. 
;;
CR 601;Differences between chemical and electrochemical reactions. 
Thermodynamic expression for equilibrium electrode potential, IUPAC convention for potentials, Use of standard potentials, Treatment of reference electrodes; principles and construction of important systems. Origin of EMF of a galvanic cell. Pourbaix diagram: concepts, computation and application to corrosion control. 

Phenomenological treatment of structure of electrical double layer; application of concepts of double layer to understanding of polarizable and nonpolarisable electrodes, inhibitors etc. 

Electrode Kinetics : Detailed treatment of Butler-Volumer relation, Stern and Greary equation and Tafel relations. Concept of exchange current density. Analysis of different forms of over voltage, Tafel slope, equilibrium potential and corrosion potential towards understanding polarizability and non polarizability of electrodes and corrosion kinetics. 

Passivity : Theories of passivation and Kinetics of passivity Instrumentation for current and voltage measurements and evaluation of electrochemical kinetics. 

;;J.O.M. Bockris and A.K.N. Reddy, Modern Electrochemistry, Vol.2, Plenum Press, New York, 1977. L. Antropov, Theoretical electrochemistry, Mir Publishers, Moscow, 1977. M. Pourbaix, Atlas of Electrochemical equilibria in Aqueous Solutions, Pergamon Press, New York, 1966. 
;;
CR 603;Low Temperature vs high temperature corrosion; Introduction to oxidation, thermodynamics of gas/metal reaction, stability of oxides/sulphides, Ellingham diagrams; oxidation kinetics-linear, parabolic, cubic, logarithmic rate laws, Wagner"s theory of oxidation. 
Types of oxidation: general oxidation, selective oxidation, internal oxidation, breakaway and catastrophic oxidation; Defects in oxides: simple defects in oxides (p & n type), Wagner Hauffe Rules, Kroger Vink notations; Oxidation vs sulphidation, Hot-Corrosion, Oxidation of important Metals and Alloys; Use of electron-optical techniques in assessing oxidation damage and understanding oxidation mechanism; Practical examples of high temperature oxidation - power plants, gas turbines, petrochemical plants etc. 

;;Per Kofstad, High Temperature Corrosion, Elsevier Applied Science, 1988. U.R.Evans, Corrosion and oxidation of metals, Arnold Publ., 1981. N.Birks and G.H.Meier, Introduction to Oxidation of Metals, Edward Arnold, London, 1983. 
;;
CR 605;The importance of surface preparation. Use of inert coatings, noble coating and sacrificial coatings for corrosion control. Corrosion control by oxide and conversion coatings like chromating, phosphating and anodizing. Quality control for protective coatings. Practical aspects of coating evaluation. Maintenance of protective systems. 
Testing, monitoring and failure investigation. 

Corrosion control with metallic coatings: principles of alloy deposition, kinetics of electrocrystallization-fine grained and coarse grained deposits, epitaxial growth and adhesion. Commercial electroplating and other techniques of obtaining metallic coatings. 

Corrosion control with paint coatings: Water dispersed epoxy coatings. Single pack water based coating systems. Coatings for special applications. 

Life expectancies of coating systems. Coating application methods. 

Powder coatings.Application by polyethylene, PVC, Nylon, PTFE, epoxies, polyesters and acrylics in the form of powders. Rubber lining. Flake glass, FRP, lay up and fabrication. Lead lining and lining of special alloy steels. The use of glass, ceramics and plastic for corrosion prevention. Corrosion control using tape wrapping systems. 

;;J. Bieslek and J. Weber Portcullis, Electrolytic and Chemical Conversion Coatings, Red Hill Press Ltd., 1976 
F.A.Lowenheim, Electroplating Fundamentals of Surface finishing, McGraw Hill, New York,1978 
R.W.Burns, and W.W.Bradley, Protective Coatings for Metals, Reinhold Pub.Corpn, 1967 
R.B.Ross, Hand Book of Metal Treatment and Testing: John Wiley, 1988 
Fedotory and S.Ya.Grilikhes, Electropolishing, Anodizing and Electrolytic Pickling of Metals. Robert Draper Ltd., 1959. 
;;
CR 606;Introduction to fatigue and fracture mechanics, ductile and brittle fractures. 
Mechanism of fatigue crack initiation and propagation. Factors influencing fatigue strength. Life prediction, prevention of fatigue failures. Corrosion fatigue, Linear elastic fracture mechanics, determination of fracture toughness, elastic-plastic fracture mechanics, sub-critical crack growth in reactive environment. 

Investigation and analysis of failures. Case studies in fatigue and fracture mechanics. 

;;S.Kocauda, Fatigue failure of metals, Sijthoffod Noordhoff, 1978. 
D.Broek, Elementary Engineering Fracture Mechanics, Noordhoff, 1975. 
S.T.Rolfe and J.M.Brasom, Fracture and Fatigue Control in Structures, Prentice Hall, 1977. 
Case Histories in Failure Analysis, American Society for Metals, 1979. ;;
CR 609;Introduction to solid mechanics, concept of stress and strength, stress-strain relationship, thermal stresses, shear-force and bending moment diagrams, Mohrs circle diagrams for multi-axial stress fields, stress fields in cylinders and rotating discs, torsion problems. 
Introduction to fluid mechanics, properties of fluid, Foundations of flow analysis, continuity equation, momentum equation and energy equation, Flow of incompressible viscous fluid, Fluid Machinery. 
;;Popov, E.P., Introduction to Mechanics of Solids, Prentice Hall, 1973. 
Streeter, V.L. Fluid Mechanics, McGraw Hill, 1976.;;
CR 611;Bonding in metals, crystal structure and microstructure of metals and alloys, metallic and non-metallic materials, characterization of microstructure, use of optical and electron optical techniques, sample preparation, polishing and etching process. 
Phase diagrams: Fe-C, Fe-Cr, Fe-Ni-Cr and classification of alloys-ferrous and non-ferrous alloys, heat treatment, concept of hardening, annealing, quenching, tempering. 

Preparation of alloys: selection of molds, preparation techniques of highly pure alloys, electroslag, vacuum and induction arc melting, segregation phenomenon and its elimination, powder metallurgy Mechanical behavior of materials- Stress Strain, concept of deformation: dislocations, frank read source, true stress true strain, elastic and plastic behavior, various mechanical tests, hardness, impact, tensile tests with theoretical principles. 

Strengthening of materials: solid solution strengthening, precipitate strengthening. 

Creep, three stages of creep, mechanisms in primary, secondary and tertiary, creep, formation of creep resistant materials. 

Fatigue of materials, low and high cycle fatigue, mechanism of fatigue. 

Fracture of materials: griffith"s theory and fracture mechanics approach to know the failure, fracture toughness, crystalline and ductile failure. 

;;L. H. Van Vlack, Elements of Materials Science and Engineering, Addision-Wesley Publishing Company, 6th Edition, 1989. S. H. Avner, Introduction to Physical Metallurgy, Macgraw-hill, 2nd edition, 1974. 
;;
CR 612;Choice of materials based on their mechanical strength, creep, fatigue, toughness, microstructural stability and corrosion resistance. 
General properties, method of preparation and application of ferritic steels/stainless steel, austenitic steels/stainless steels, superalloys, ODS alloys, rapidly solidified materials, single crystals, intermetallics, refractories and composite materials. 

Need of protective coatings at high temperatures, Diffusion coatings, PVD and CVD coatings , ion-plating ion-sputtering, electron beam coatings, laser glazing and laser alloying. 

;;E.Bullock et al, Research and Development of High Temperature Materials for Industry, Elseiver Sci. Pub., 1989. 
O.Van Der Biest, Analysis of High Temperature Materials, Appl. Sci. Publ. 1986. 
E.Lang, Editor, Coatings for High Temperature Applications, Appl.Sci.Pub., 1983. 
H.Leidheiser Jr., Corrosion Control by Coatings, Science Press Princeton, 1979. 
;;
CR 615;Importance of Corrosion, Computation of Corrosion rates, Thermodynamics of Corrosion, Passivation, Mixed potential theory of corrosion and its application to understand the influence of oxidizers, effect of velocity of the medium, galvanic corrosion: area relationship in both active and passive states of metals. 
Different forms of corrosion and their control viz., uniform corrosion, galvanic corrosion, selective leaching, crevice corrosion, filiform corrosion, pitting corrosion, intergranular corrosion, erosion corrosion, fretting damage, stress corrosion cracking, corrosion fatigue, hydrogen embrittlement and microbes induced corrosion. 

Elementary treatment of corrosion testing procedures, inhibitors, corrosion of steels.
;;Corrosion Engineering, Mars. G. Fontana, McGraw Hill, 3rd edition, Singapore, 1987. H.H. Uhlig and R.W. Revie 3rd edition, Corrosion and its control, John Wiley, Singapore, 1991. 
;;
CR 616;Design of field and laboratory experiments, Galvanic, Pitting and Crevice corrosion, Intergranular corrosion, Stress corrosion cracking and Corrosion fatigue. Application of optical, scanning electron and transmission electron microscopes, X-ray diffraction, EPMA, Auger and Photo electron spectroscopy. Influence of composition and microstructure and their control and materials selection. 

Design involving Geometry, Fabrication such as welding, piping system and plant layout for corrosion prevention. 

Treatment of water for recirculating systems. 

Cathodic Protection: principle, classification - sacrificial and impressed current, types of anodes, soil surveys, life estimation of anodes, rectifiers-selection criteria, stray current corrosion, monitoring of CP - pipelines and offshore structures. 

Anodic protection : Principles and applications Failure analysis : Principles and detailed methodology, case studies from various industrial failures. 

;CR 615;C.R. Pludek, Design and Corrosion control, Macmillan, London, 1977. 
S.K. Couburn, Corrosion Source book, ed. NACE and ASM Metals Park Ohio, 1984. 
Corrosion Vol. 13, Metals Hand book 9th edition, Ohio: 1987. 
Failure Analysis and Prevention, Vol. 11, Metals Handbook, 9th edition, Ohio 1986. 
;;
CR 618;Principles of friction and wear, mechanism of adhesive, abrasive, corrosive and erosive wear, fretting and fatigue, fundamentals of erosion and erosion-corrosion, wear maps, erosion corrosion maps, introduction to surface engineering, coatings for wear, erosion corrosion and corrosion resistance, requirements for high temperature coatings, principles of CVD, PVD, plasma spraying,carburizing, and nitriding, ion implantation, laser surface alloying, life prediction of coated surface, economic consideration and future coating requirements. ;;Friction, lubrication and wear technology, Vol-18, ASM Metals Handbook, 9th edition, Ohio, 1992. 
Hutchings, I.M., Tribology - Friction & Wear of Engineering Materials, Edward Arnold - Great Britain, 1992. 
;;
CR 626;Estimation of uniform corrosion by weight loss measurement. Study of pitting corrosion by cyclic polarisation. Study of intergranular corrosion. Oxidation kinetics of mild steel, titanium and copper. 
Estimation of break away oxidation by acoustic emission. Corrosion prevention by paint coatings. Effect of inhibitors. Hydrogen over

;;;;
EN 601; Conventional sources of commercial energy : fossil fuels, nuclear energy and hydroelectric power; Their consumption rates. Energy reserves and estimates of time for which conventional sources will last. Alternative energy sources. 
The solar option - direct and indirect applications. Availability of solar radiation Energy collection and concentration for photothermal applications. Thermal storage. 

Introduction to photo-voltaic and thermoelectric conversion. Wind energy. Types of wind mills. Elementary design principles. Ocean thermal energy conversion. 

Biomass as a source of energy. Energy plantation. Production of fuel from wood, agricultural and animal waste. Bioconversion processes. 

Bio-gas, its generation and utilization. 

;;J.A. Duffie and W.A. Beckman, Solar Engineering of Thermal Processes, John Wiley, 1980.

F. Kreith and J.F. Kreider. Principles of Solar Engineering. McGraw-Hill, 1978.;;
EN 602;Measurement of solar radiation and sunshine hours. Experiments based on solar thermal concentrators. Characteristics of photovoltaic devices, Bioconversion processes. ;;;;
EN 603; The nuclear option-fission and fusion technology fundamentals. Thermal and fast reactor. State of art. Breeder reactors. Prospects and limitations. Economics. 
Geothermal Energy Systems. Extent of available resources. Heat Transport in geothermal systems. Introduction to tidal and wave energy. M.H.D. power. Fuel cells. 

Biochemical Engineering : Introduction to chemicals of life, enzymes, kinetics and Michaelis-Menten equation. Introduction to microorganisms growth requirements, growth kinetics, Monod equation. 
;;T.N. Veziroglu, Alternative Energy Sources, Vol. 5 and 6, McGraw-Hill, 1978. 
J.E.Bailey and D.F. Ollis, Biochemical Engineering Fundamentals. McGraw Hill 1977. 
S.Aiba, A.E. Humphrey, N.F. Mills, Biochemical Engineering. Academic Press, 1973. 
;;
ME 660; Fluid Dynamics Equations in Eulerian systems, the characteristic method, finite element methods and application in fluid dynamics, solution of physical flow problems. 

;A;M. Holt, Numerical Methods in Fluid Dynamics, Springer, 1977. 
F. Thomasset, Implementation of Finite Element Methods for Navier-Stokes Equations, Springer, 1981. 
H.J. Wirz and J.J. Smolderen, Numerical Methods in Fluid Dynamics McGraw-Hill, 1978. 
;;
EN 605; Principles of conventional energy conversion methods using fossil fuels, nuclear and hydro power. Environmental aspects of these energy sources. Thermal and particulate pollution. Acid rains, sulphurous smog, green house effect. 
Theory of petrol, diesel and gas turbine engines. Thermodynamic analysis and description of various systems. Combustion in petrol and diesel engines. Detonation and knocking in I.C. Engines. Use of various alternative fuels. Supercharging and turbocharging. 

Emisions from I.C.Engines. Primary and secondary pollutants. 

Photochemical smog. Transient Working of I.C. Engines used in mobile applications. Systems approach for the minimization of these transients for best fuel economy and emission parameters in these applications. 

Conventional and microprocessor based control of A/F ratio, ignition and injection timing, speed and emissions from I.C. Engines.
;;M.Khovakh, Motor Vehicle Engines, MIR, 1978. 
H.Cohen, C.F. Rogers and H.I.H. Survanamutto, Gas turbine theory, Longman, 1972. 
J.M.Fowler, Energy and the Environment, McGraw Hill, 1975. 
;;
EN 607;Importance of energy management. Energy auditing : methodology, analysis of past trends( plant data), closing the energy balance , laws of thermodynamics, measurements, portable and on line instruments. 
Energy economics - discount rate, payback period, internal rate of Return, life cycle costing. Steam Systems : Boiler -efficiency testing , excess air control , Steam distribution & use- steam traps , condensate recovery , flash steam utilisation. Thermal Insulation. 

Electrical Systems : Demand control, power factor correction, load scheduling/shifting, Motor drives- motor efficiency testing, energy efficient motors, motor speed control. 

Lighting- lighting levels, efficient options,fixtures,daylighting, timers, Energy efficient windows. 

Energy conservation in Pumps , Fans (flow control), Compressed Air Systems, Refrigeration & air conditioning systems. Waste heat recovery : recuperators, heat wheels, heat pipes, heat pumps. 

Cogeneration - concept, options(steam/gas turbines/diesel engine based), selection criteria , control strategy. Heat exchanger networking- concept of pinch, target setting, problem table approach, composite curves. Demand side management. Financing energy conservation 

;;1. L.C.Witte, P.S.Schmidt, D.R.Brown , Industrial Energy Management and Utilisation, Hemisphere Publ, Washington,1988. 
2. Industrial Energy Conservation Manuals, MIT Press, Mass, 1982. 
3. The Efficient Use of Energy, Ed: I.G.C.Dryden, Butterworths, London, 1982 
4. Energy Management Handbook, Ed: W.C.Turner, Wiley, New York, 1982. 
5. Technology Menu for Efficient energy use- Motor drive systems, Prepared by National Productivity Council and Center for & Environmental Studies- Princeton Univ, 1993. ;;
EN 610;Properties of hydrogen with respect to its utilization as a renewanble form of energy i.e. in form of hydrogen and ammonia. 
Sources of hydrogen, water, the thermodynamics of water splitting. 

Production of hydrogen, direct electrolysis of water, dirct thermal decomposition of water, thermochemical production of hydrogen, biological and biochemical methods. 

Transportation and storage of hydrogen, gaseous, cryogenic and metal hydride. Utilisation of hydrogen. Safe burning of hydrogen, catalytic oxidation of hydrogen fuel cell Utilisation of ammonia as a fuel. 

Latest applications of hydrogen and ammonia as a renewable fuel. 

;;T.Ohta (Ed.), Solar hydrogen Energy System Pergomon Press, 1979. 
D.A. Maths, Hydorgen Technlogy for Energy, Noyes Data Corpn, 1976. 
S.S.Pener and L. Iceman, Energy Vol.II. Addison Wesley, 1974. ;;
EN 611; The SUN, its structure, fusion reaction in sun"s core, solar radiation and its intensity at AM0, AM1 and AM2. Physics of SEMICONDUCTOR : Properties of semiconductor which are relevant to p : n junction band diagram, Fermi Energy, Surface states, types of defects. Photovoltaic Solar Cell : p : n junction Metal - Schottky junction, Electrolyte-semiconductor junction, types of solar cells, their applications. 
Experimental techniques to determine the characteristics of solar cells. 

Photovoltaic hybride systems, Photovoltaic thermal systems, storage battery, solar array and their characteristics evaluation, solar chargeable battery. 

Fuel cells with special reference to hydrogen oxygen and carbondioxide/air systems. 

;;M.Sharon and K.S.V.Santhanam(Ed.) Photoelectrochemicl solar cells,. lsevier, 1988. 
S.M.Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices Wiley Eastern, Ltd.1983. 
M.A.Omar, Elementary Solid State Phyics : Principles and Applications, Addison-Wesley, 1975. 
Energy technology hand book, Considine, McGraw Hill, 1977. 
Hand book Batteries and Fuel Cells. Linden, McGraw Hill, 1984. 
;;
EN 613; Radioactivity, Nuclear reactions, Cross sections, Nuclear fission, Power from fission, Conversion and breeding, Neutron transport equation, Diffusion theory approximation, Fick"s law, Solutions to diffusion equation for point source, Planar source, etc. Energy loss in elastic collisions, Collision and slowing down densities, Moderation in hydrogen, Lethargey. concept, Moderation in heavy nucleus. 
Moderation with absorption, Resonance absorption, NR and NRIM approximations. Multiregion reactors, Multigroup diffusion methods, Thermal reactors, Heterogeneous reactors. Reactor kinetics. in hour equation, Coefficients of reactivity, Control, Fission product poison. 

Perturbation theory. 

;;J.R. Lamarsh, Introduction to Nuclear Reactor Theory, Wesley, 1966 
J.J. Duderstadt and L.J. Hamilton, Nuclear Reactor Analysis, John Wiley, 1976 
;;
EN 614;Electrochemical energy storage systems, classification and criteria. 
Review of candidate systems, Rechargeable batteries, lead, zinc, nickel,silver, iron, sodium, sulphur and manganese dioxide systems. 

Regenerative fuel ells. Hydrogen, Oxygen and dissolved redox coupled fuel cells. Choice of appropriate systems - assessment for rural needs and estimation of effective costs. 

;;Collins, Batteries, Vol. I and II 
Faulk and Salkins, Silver Zinc - Alkaline Storage Systems. 
Arjun Makhijani, Energy and Agriculture in the Third World, Ballinger Publication Co., Cambridge, 1975. 
P.H. Henderson, India - The Energy Sector. Oxford University Press, 1975. 
;;
EN 615;Wind. Its structure, Statistics, measurements, and data presentation. 
Wind turbine aerodynamics. Momentum theories. Basic aerodynamics, Airfoils and their characteristics. HAWT - Blade Element Theory, Prandtl"s Lifting Line Theory (prescribed wake analysis). VAWT Aerodynamics. 

Wind turbine loads. Aerodynamic loads in steady operation, wind turbulence, yawed operation and tower shadow. 

Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS) Siting, rotor selection. 

Annual Energy Output. 

Horizontal Axis Wind Turbine (HAWT) rotor design considerations. 

Number of blades, blade profile, 2/3 blades and teetering, coning, upwind/downwind, power regulation, yaw system, tower. 

Synchronous and asynchronous generators and loads, integration of wind energy converters to electrical networks, invertors. Testing of WECS. WECS control system, requirements and strtegies. 

Miscellaneous topics. Noise etc. 

;;Freris L.L., Wind Energy Conversion Systems, Prentice Hall 1990. 
Spera D.A., Wind Turbine Technology: Fundamental Concepts of Wind Turbine Engineering, ASME Press, NY 1994. 
Johnson, G.L., Wind Energy Systems, Prentice Hall, 1985. 
;;
EN 618; Energy Chain, Primary energy analysis. Modelling overview- levels of analysis, steps in model development, examples of models. 
Quantitative Techniques : Interpolation - polynomial, lagrangian. 

curvefitting , regression analysis, solution of transcendental equations. 

Systems Simulation- information flow diagram, solution of set of nonlinear algebraic equations, successive substitution,Newton Raphson. 

Examples of energy systems simulation Optimisation : Objectives/constraints, problem formulation.Unconstrained problems- Necessary & Sufficiency conditions. Constrained Optimisation- lagrange multipliers,constrained variations, Kuhn-Tucker conditions. 

Linear Programming - Simplex tableau, pivoting, sensitivity analysis. Dynamic Programming . Search Techniques-Univariate/Multivariate. Case studies of optimisation in Energy systems problems. 

Dealing with uncertainty- probabilistic techniques. Trade-offs between capital & energy using Pinch Analysis. Energy- Economy Models: Scenario Generation, Input Output Model. Numerical solution of Differential equations- Overview, Convergence, Accuracy. Transient analysis- application example. 

;;1. W.F. Stoecker Design of Thermal Systems, Mcgraw Hill, 1981 
2. S.S.Rao Optimisation theory and applications, Wiley Eastern, 1990 
3. S.S. Sastry Introductory methods of numerical analysis,Prentice Hall, 1988 
4. P. Meier Energy Systems Analysis for Developing Countries, Springer Verlag,1984 
5.R.de Neufville, Applied Systems Analysis , Mcgraw Hill, International Edition,1990 
6. Beveridge and Schechter,Optimisation Theory and Practice,Mcgraw Hill, 1970 
7. B.Linnhoff User Guide on Process Integration for the Efficient Use of;;
EN 620;Heat generation in reactors, Steady state and transient temperature distribution in reactors, Subchannel analyis, Natural convection cooling, Partial flow failures, Loss of coolant accident, Emergency cooling system, Containment pressurization, Post accident heat removal. Characteristics of materials for fuel, clad, moderator, coolant, control, shielding and structural materials. Reactor instrumentation. Power reactor systems with emphasis on CANDU. ;;S. Glasstone and A. Sesonske, Nuclear Reactor Engineering (III Ed.), Von. Nostrand, 1981. 
R.H.S. Winterton, Thermal Design of Nuclear Reactors, Pergamon Press, 1981. 
E.E.Lewis, Nuclear Reactor Safety, Wiley Interscience, 1977. 
J. Weisman (Ed.), Elements of Nuclear Reactor Design, Elsevier Scientific Pub. Co., 1977. 
;;
ME 661;Concepts of classical thermodynamics. Application of I and II laws to closed and open systems. Availability analysis of thermal systems and the concept of energy conservation. 
Phase and reaction equilibria. Equilibrium constants. calculation of equilibrium composition of multi component gasesous mixtures. 

Equations of state and calculation of thermodynamics and transport properties of substances. 

Reaction rates and first, second and higher order reactions. Reactions in gaseous, liquid and solid phases. 

Combustion and flame velocities, Laminar and turbulent flames. Premixed and diffusion flames their properties and structures. 

Theories of flame propagation, thermal, diffusion and comprehensive theories, Problems of flame stability, flashback and blow off. 

Combustion of solid, liquid and gaseous fuels. Combustion of fuel droplets and sprays. Measurements in combustion systems. 

Combustion systems. Combustion in closed and open systems. Applications to IC Engines. Boilers, gas turbine combustors and rocket motors. 

;;K.G. Denbigh, Principles of Chemical Equilibrium, Cambridge, 1971. 
A.G. Gaydon and H.G. Wolfhard, "Flames" Chapman Hall, 1979. 
B. Lewis and G. Von Elbe, Combustion, Flames and Explosions of Gases, Academic Press, 1961. 
M.W. Zemansky, Heat and Thermodynamics 4Ed. McGraw Hill, 1968. ;;
EN 622;Characteristics of LWR, HWR, GCR, and FBR. Fission product barriers, Accident characterisation, Safety philosophy, Safety systems. LMFBR Vs. LWR safety characteristics, Accident initiators, Overpower transients with feedback. Design basis accident, Hypothetical core disruptive accidents, Bedthe-Tait accident. Protected transients, Decay heat removal systems, Local fault propogation, Flow blockage, Molten fuel-coolant interaction. Unprotected transients, Physical phases of accident sequences, pre-disassembly, Transition and disassembly phases. Biological effects of radiation, Radiation protection standards, Radiation shielding, Release of radioactive materials and dispersion using diffusion models. ;;E.E. Lewis, Nuclear Power Reactor Safety, Wiley Interscience, 1977. 
A.E.Walter and A.B. Reynolds, Fast Breeder Reactors, Pergamon Press, 1981. 
;;
EN 624; Climates and buildings. Thermal properties and energy content of building materials, Psychrometry, Comfort conditions, Airconditioning systems. Energy conservation techniques in Airconditioning systems. 
Lighting (Daylighting and Electric lighting). Passive and active methods of heating and cooling. Estimation of building loads. Steady state method, Network method, Numerical method, Corelations. Computer packages for carrying out thermal design of buildings and predicting performance. 

;;M.S.Sodha, N.K. Bansal, P.K. Bansal, A. Kumar and M.A.S. Malik, Solar Passive Building, Science and Design, Pergamon Press, 1986. 
J.R. Williams, Passive Solar Heating, Ann Arbar Science, 1983. 
R.W.Jones, J.D. Balcomb, C.E. Kosiewiez, 
G.S. Lazarus, R.D. McFarland and W.O. Wray, Passive Solar Design Handbook, Vol. 3, Report of U.S. Department of Energy (DOE/CS-0127/3), 1982. 
J.L. Threlkeld, Thermal Environmental Engineering, Prentice Hall, 1970.;;
EN 626;Biomass resource assessment, Biomass availability for energy. 
Introduction to the concept of energy plantation, Scope and limitations, Wasteland development, Biomass as an industrial and domestic fuel, Energy management in agriculture. 

Biomass Conservation Processes : Thermochemical conversion design of reactors, technology development and assessment, Performance evaluation and testing, intercompatability criteria, their importance, safety measures, regulations and legislations, envioronmental impact assessment, Bioconversion process - the process, Parametric influences on gas generation rate, Reactor design, Case studies of existing technology, Government programmes and environmental impact assessment. 

Thermochemical characterisation, Densification or briquetting, Biomass binders, Stoves, Efficiency of stoves. Utilisation of biomass based fuels for thermal and shaft power applications. 

;;D.O. Hall, G.W. Barnard, and P.A. Moss, Biomass for Energy in the Developing Countries, Current Roles, Potential, Problems, Prospects, Pergamon Press Ltd., 1982. 
L.P. White, L.G. Claskett, Biomass as Fuel, Academic Press, 1981. 
T.B. Read, Biomass Gasification Principles and Technology, Energy Technology Review, No. 67, Noyes Data Croporation, U.S.A., 1981. 
V.J. Patel, A New Strategy for High Density Agroforestry, Jivraj Patel Agroforestry Centre, Gujarat, 1988. 
A. Kaupp and J.R. Goss, State of Art Report for small scale Gas Producerengine Systems, Friedr Vieweg & Sohn Verlag sgesellschaft mbh, Braunschweig, 1984. 
D.W. Robinson and R.C. Mollan, Energy Management and Agriculture, Elsevier Science Publishers, 1982. 
;;
EN 630;Solar radiation availability measurement and estimation, isotropic and anisotropic models. 
Introduction to solar collectors (Liquid Flat-Plate collector, air heater and concentrating collector) and thermal storage. State state and transient analysis. Solar pond. Modelling of solar thermal systems and simulations in process design. Design of active systems by f-chart and utilizability methods. Water Heating Systems - active and passive. 

Passive Heating and Cooling of Buildings. Solar Distillation. Solar Drying. 

;;1. S.P.Sukhatme - Solar Energy : Principles of Thermal Collection and storage, Tata-McGraw Hill (1984). 
2. J.A. Duffie and W.A. Beckman-Solar Engineering of Thermal Processes-John Wiley(1991). 
3. M.S. Sodha, N.K. Bansal, P.K. Bansal, A. Kumar, and M.A.S Malik-Solar Passive Building : Science and Design, Pergamon Press (1986). 
4. M.A.S. Malik, G.N.Tiwari, A.Kumar and M.S. Sodha, Solar Distillation, Pergamon Press(1982). 
5. J.F.Kreider and F. Kreith - Solar Energy Handbook McGraw Hill (1981). 
;;
IE 635;Objectives in location and layout of facilities. Planning for production flow systems. Activity relationships. 
Personnel and organizational factors; Developing alternatives of layout for facilities for particular functions; Manufacturing, Receiving and shipping, Storage and warehousing systems. Principles of factory layout. 

Quantitative and computer-aided approaches to facilities layout. Constructive and improvement procedures. 

Interaction of layout and flow system design philosophies; Analysis of different types of assembly lines. Flexibility in assembly lines and flow lines, Automation and computer aids in warehousing operations. 

Introduction to Group Technology and Cellular Manufacturing Location of multiple facilities ,Expansion of facilities; Strategic considerations and current trends. 

Case Studies 

;;Tompkins J.A. and White J.A., Facilities Planning, Wiley, (1984). 
Apple J.M. , Plant Layout and Materials handling , Wiley, (1977). 
Francis R.L. and White J.A., Facilities Layout and Location, Prentice Hall,(1974). 
Smith D.M.,Industrial Location, An Economic Geographic Analysis, Wiley, (1971). 
Mirchandani.S and Handler G.Y., Location on Networks, Wiley, (1977). 
Sule D.R., Manufacturing Facilities : Location, Planning and Design, PWS-Kent, (1988). 
Burbidge J.L., Group Technology in the Engineering Industry, Mechanical Engg. Publications Ltd., London, (1979). 
Gallagher C.C. and Knight W.A., Group Technology Production Methods in Manufacture, Ellis Horwood Ltd. England, (1986). 
Gallagher C.C., Knight W.A., Group Technology, Butter-worths, London (1973). ;;
IE 638;Industry wise study of documented work on Operations Research problems arising in major industries: Steel, Textile, Chemical,Electrical,Power,Transportation and others. Study of some applications include cosideration of practical difficulties, inrespect of applicability and efficacy of computational techniques, in dealing with large problems.

Case studies.

; MG 615 or Equivalen;Bowman E.H. and Fetter R.B., Analysis of Industrial Operations, Irwin, (1959). 
Geoffrion A.M., Elements of large-scale Mathematical Programming in Perspectives on Optimization,Addison-Wesley,(1972). 
White D.J.,Decision Methodology,Wiley,(1976). 
Mckenney and Rosenbloom, Cases in Operations Management, Wiley, (1966). 
Ray and Szekely, Process Optimization, Wiley, (1973). 
Brandley, Hax and Magnati, Applied Mathematical Programming, Addison - Wesley, (1977). 
;;
IE 641;Multi-terminal Maximal flows, Multi- terminal shortest paths. Multi commodity flows. Synthesis of networks. The general minimal cost flow problem, Minimal cost calculation,Network Simplex Method.Matching problems and the bottleneck assignment problem.Application to vehicle routing problems. Determination of size and schedules for transportation fleets.Synchronisation of signalised interactions. Project Scheduling with resource constraints,Network flows in the economy, Input -output analysis. ;;Rockafeller R.T., Network Flows and Monotropic Optimisation, Wiley,(1984). 
Ahuja R.K.,Magnanti T.L.and Orlin J.B., Network flows :Theory, Algorithms and Applications, Prentice Hall, (1993). 
Bazaraa M.S., Jarvis J.J. & Sherali H.D., Linear Programming and Network flows, New York, John Wiley,(2nd ed.),(1990). 
Ford L.R. and Fulkerson D.R., Flow in Networks,Princeton, (1962). 
Hu T.C.,Integer Programming and Network flows,Addison-Wesley, (1969). 
Steenbrink P.A., Optimization of Transportation Networks, Wiley, (1974). 
Iri M., Transportation, Scheduling and Network flows, Academic Press, (1969). 
Minieka Edward,Optimisation Algorithms for Networks & Graphs, Marcel Dekker,New York (1978). 
Chvatal V. ,Linear Programming, New York ,Freeman W.H.,(1983). 
;;
IE 642;Cost concepts, job order and process costing, Standard costs and variances. Cost volume profit relationships. Costing of joint products and by conducts. Profit measurements. Financial statement analysis. Capital investment planning, perfect ranking using present worth, internal rate of return and MAPI urgency rating. Replacement analysis. Financing of manufacturing enterprises. Cost of capital. Capital budgeting; risk and uncertainty, application of linear programming. Full and variable cost pricing. Transfer pricing. Income tax and engineering economy. ;;G.L. Moore and R.K. Jaekicke, Managerial Accounting south-Western Publishing Co., Chicago, 22nd Ed. 1967. 
A. Matz and M.F. Usry, Cost accounting Planning and Control, Taraporevala-South-Western 6th Ed. 1976. 
H.N. Weingamer, Mathematical Programming and the analysis of Capital Budgeting problems, Prentice Hall, 1963. 
;;
ME 662; 
Flow classifications, mass, momentum and energy relations in differential form. Exact and approximate solutions to forced convection in laminar and turbulent, internal and external flow. 
Solution to natural convection problems. Heat transfer at high velocity and incompressible fluid. Liquid metal heat transfer. Convective mass transfer. Reacting flows. 

Mass transfer. Transport equations. Mass transfer across interface. 

Heat and mass transfer in separated flows. 


;;W.M. Rays, Convective Heat and Mass Transfer, McGraw Hill, 1966. 
E.R.G. Eckert and R.M. Drake Jr., Analysis of Heat Transfer, McGraw-Hill, 1972. 
;;
IE 644;Review of probability theory, survey of stochastic Processes, Bernoulli processes, Poisson processes, Renewal theory, Markov chains, Markov processes, Markov Renewal theory, Markov Decision theory, Rando Walks and Martingales, Applications of the above Stochastic processes in queueing theory inventory control, Reliability and maintenance, risk theory, population studies. 

;MA 603;
E. Cinlar, Introduction to Stochastic Processes, Prentice Hall, 1975. 
S.M. Ross, Stochastic Processes, John Wiley and Sons, 1983. 
S.M. Ross, Applied Probability Models with Optimisation Applications, Holden - Day 1970. 
J. Medhi, Stochastic Processes, Wiley Eastern 1982. 
;;
IE 645; Importance of scheduling in implementation of production planning. Common measures of performance. Exact solutions in some one/two processor serial systems. Heuristics in flow shop and job shop scheduling problems. Scheduling of projects with limited resources and in long cycle job shops. Scheduling in dynamic flow systems. Use of priority disciplines. Scheduling balancing and other aspects of design in mixed model assembly lines and flow lines. Scheduling in process industries with no waiting or limited work in process. parallel processor, bin packing heuristics and applications. Group technology as decomposition of job shops. Vehicles scheduling problems. 
Personal scheduling. 

Case Studies in Indian Industries. 

;NIL;R.W. Conway, W.L. Maxwell and L.W. Miller, Theory of Scheduling, Addison, Wesley, 1967. 
K.R. Baker, Introduction to Sequencing and Scheduling, Wiley, 1974. 
E.G. Coffman, Computer and Job shop Scheduling Theory, Wiley, 1976. 
A.H.G. Rinnooy Kan, Machine Scheduling Problems, Classification, Complexity and Computations, Martiums Nijhoff, The Hague, 1976. 
S. French, Sequency and Scheduling, Ellis Horwook Ltd., Chichester, U.K. 1982. 
D.D. Bedworth and J.E. Bailey, Integrated Production Control Systems, Wiley, 1982. 
;;
IE 646;Basic Concepts in Assurance Technology, Terminilogies, Definitions, Approaches and Important issues. 
Product Quality Control : Acceptance Sampling Methods-Single Multiple and Sequential Sampling Plans; Recent developments in inspection methods. 
Process Evaluation and Control by Control Charts: Various control charts including CUSUM charts and Multivariate charts. 
Process Evaluation and Control by Designs of Experiment: Various basic designs; Special Methods like EVOP, RSM and ROBUST Designs 
Process Capability Studies : Use of  control charts, Various indices, SPAN PLAN METHOD and use of Nomographs 
Total Quality Management perspective, methodologies and procedures 
Road map to TQM: Quality Function Deployment, ISO 9000, Quality Cost System, KAIZEN, Quality Circles, Quality Policy Deployment and Models for organisational excellence. 
Reliability Engineering ; Statistical analysis of life time data and determination of Reliability, Availability and Maintainability ; Development and Applications of Fault Tree Diagrams, Cause and Effect Diagrams, FMECA and FRACAS. 
JIT ,Total Productivity Maintenance and Quality perspectives 

;;1. A.J. Duncan, "Quality Control and Industrial Statistics"; Richard D. Irwin INC, USA, 1965. 
2. A.V. Feigenbaum, "Total Quality Control", Mc Graw Hill International Editions, USA, 1987. 
3. S. Halpern, "The Assurance Sciences", Prentice Hall India Ltd., New Delhi, 1979. 
4. A. Zaidi, "SPC, Concepts, Methodologies and Tools", Prentice Hall India Ltd., New Delhi, 1995. 
5. D.C. Montgomery, "Design and Analysis of Experiments", John Wiley and Sons, USA, 1984. 
6. J. Juran, "Quality Control Handbook", McGraw Hill Book Comp;;
ME 663;Heat conduction - basic law, governing equations in differential form, solution methods, steady state, unsteady state problems-fins, moving boundaries. Convective heat transfer - conservation equations, boundary layer approximations. Forced convective laminar and turbulent flow solutions. Natural convection solutions, correlations. 
Radiation heat transfer mechanism; properties; exchange between black and non black surfaces, condensation - mechanism, controlling parameters. Nusselt Theory; solution to laminar film modifications, influence of other parameters, correlations for single horizontal tube, vertical bank of horizontal tubes, other configurations. 

Dropwise condensation. Boiling mechanisms regimes. Basic models, correlations. 

Mass Transfer- governing laws, transfer coefficients; application. 

Heat exchangers. Design principles. 

;;E.R.G. Eckerst and R.M. Drake Jr, Analysis of Heat Transfer, McGraw-Hill, 1972. W.M. Roshenow and P. Choi, Heat, Mass and Momentum Transfer, Prentice - Hall, 1961. 
B. Gebhart, Heat Transfer, McGraw-Hill, 1971. 
;;
IE 647;Examples of integer programmes; capital budgeting, multicommodity, distribution, airline crew scheduling, truck delivery problems. cutting plane methods, Dual fractional integer and mixed programming. Dual and primal all integer algorithms. Branch and bound methods, surrogate constraints, Recursions for the Knapsack problems, a periodic property of solutions; group knapsack problem. Set covering and set partitioning problem. 

;IM 601;H.M. Salkin, Integer Programming, Addison-Wesley, 1975. 
R.S. Garfinkel and G.L. Nemhauser, Integer Programming, Wiley-interscience, 1972. 
T.C.Hu, Integer programming and Network Flows, Addison-Wiley, 1969. 
H.Taha, Integer programming, Academic Press, 1971. 
H. Greenberg, Integer Programming, Academic Press, 1971. ;;
ME 665; ;;;;
IE 648;Objectives of financial management. Risk aversion, utility and gambling. Financial analysis and planning, balance sheet, income statement funds flow analysis, financial ratio analysis, discriminant analysis, limitations of ratio analysis, cost-volume-profit analysis; operation and financial leverages. 
Investment decision under certainty and uncertainty. Resolution of inconsistency between NPV and IRR as ranking criteria. 

Portfolio selection and capital budgeting. Analysis of selected investment decisions. 

Working capital management cash, marketable securities, receivables, inventories. Short term financing. 

Cost of capital under certainty/uncertainty and perfect capital market/capital rationing, cost of debt, prefereed stock, convertibles, common equity under static and growth conditions. 

;;I.M. Pandey, Financial Management, Vikas, 1979. 
G.M. Samuels, and F.M. Wikes, Management of Company Finance, Neison, 1975. 
J.C.T. Mao, Quantitative Analysis of Financial Decisions, Mac Millan, 1969. 
Bierman, Harold, Financial Policy Decisions, Mac Millan, 1970. 
P.T. Fitzroy, Analytical Methods for Marketing Management, McGraw Hill, 1976. 
;;
IE 650;Overview of design, planning, scheduling and control decision problems of flexible manufacturing systems; party type selection, grouping of machines, parts production ratios, allocation of pallets and fixtures, and machine loading and part routing, parts input strategy, real-time scheduling, hierarchy in solution procedures. 

Methodologies for analysis/ optimization and their range of applications. Open and closed queuing networks, estimation of average production rate, queue lengths and machine utilizations, Mean value Analysis (MVA), mathematical programming for machine loading and part routing subject to practical constraints, concepts for optimizing flow-control and route-control, scheduling techniques for a flexible manufacturing line, FMS scheduling with dynamic features such as look-ahead, scheduling for machine centers served by a cyclic conveyor, sequencing problems in NC punch process, AGV scheduling, stacker crane scheduling, sequencing of robot activities, concepts of timed Petri Nets, scope for use of expert systems, use of simulation methods. Performance evaluation of FMS. 

;IM 601;Kusiak, A.(Ed.), Modelling and Design of Flexible manufacturing Systems, Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam, 1986. 
Raouf A. and S.I. Ahmed (Eds.), Flexible Manufacturing, Elsevier, 1986. 
Kusiak, A.(Ed.), Flexible Manufacturing Systems: Methods and Studies, North Holland, 1986. 
Ranky, P.G., Flexible manufacturing Cells and Systems in CIM, CIM Ware Ltd, Guildford, Survey,U.K., 1990. 
Viswanadham N. and Y. Narahari, Performance Modelling of Automated Manufacturing Systems, Prentice Hall. N.J. 1992. 
Selected articles in standard international Journals such as Int. 
J. of FMS, IJPR, IIE Transactions etc. 
;;
IE 652;Production flow processes; Fundamental types of systems for efficient inventory management in large integrated production flow systems; PUSH/feedforward and PULL/feedback control elements incorporated in prevalent systems in practice; MRP, MRP II, JIT Kanban, OPT, Hierarchical Planning Systems; Hybrids of push & pull systems; issues of decentralization of control; role of information and database systems; effecting integration in supply chains. 
Determinants of Lead Times in batch manufacturing; impact of setup times, batch sizes and uncertainties in demands, shop yields and material supplies; controlling bottlenecks and delays through capacity allocation policies. 

Effectiveness of MRP & MRP II systems; alternatives for Master Production Scheduling processes, ordering policies, policies governing safety stocks/times and other approaches for robust performance under uncertainties; Cyclic Planning Systems; CRP; role of finite-resource forward scheduling; shop floor control over batch sizes and transfer quantities. 
;;A.C. Hax and D.Candea, Production and Inventory Management, Prentice Hall, 1984. 
M.G.Korgaonkar, Just in Time Manufacturing, MacMillan India, 1992. 
M.Baudin, Manufacturing Systems Analysis With Application To Production Scheduling, Yourdon Press and Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1990. 
S.F.Love, Inventory Control, McGraw Hill, 1979. 
S.C.Graves, A.H.G.Rinnooy Kan and P.H.Zipkin, Logistics of Production and Inventory, North-Holland, 1993. 
;;
IE 694;This lab is intended to give the students some computational experience in creation and manipulation of databases, and a practical exposure to the basic working principles of knowledge based decision support systems. 
The student"s computational work would involve soluction of illustrative problems using higher level languages such as C and C++, scientific computationsl packages and some database and expert system related software, where necessary. 

The lab will be supported by some lectures covering fundamental concepts and principles of working of some of the systems. 

;;Bonczek R.H., Holsapple C.W., and Whinston A.B., Foundations of Decision Support systems, Academic Press, 1981. 
Gallagher J.P., Knowledge Systems for Business, Prentice Hall, 1988. 
Turban E., Decision Suport and Expert Systems, (2d Edition), Macmillan 1990. 
Silverman B.G., Expert Systems for Business, Addison-Wesley, 1987. 
Kerr, Roger, Knowledge-Based Manufacturing Management, Addison Wesley, 1991. 
;;
IE 691;Harmonic analysis of stationary random processes; spectral representation of the process; stationary process; stationary processes with spectral densities. 
Linear extrapolation, filtering and interpolation of stationary processes. 

Stationary moing average autoregressie ARMA and ARIMA process; estimation of parameters; verification: identification, Maximum and mean likelihood estimation. Box Jenkins modelling applications in economic and business, Consistent estimation of autospectrum and cross spectrum. Choice of spectral window. Use of Digital filters. Kalman filter, FFT. Transfer function model estimation; Closed loop models. 

Alternative to Box Jenkins approach, ARUA models. 

;;Yu. A. Rozano, Stationary Random Processes, Holden-Day, 1967. 
G.M. Jenkins and D.G. Watts, Spectral Analysis and its Applications, Holden-Day, 1968. 
G.E.P. Box and G.M. Jenkins, Time Series Analysis, Forecasting and Control, Holden-Day, 1970. 
O.D. Anderson, the Statistical Analysis of Time Series, Wiley, 1978. 
O.D. Anderson and M.R. Perryman Eds. Time Series Analysis, North-Holland, 1981. 
;;
RE 601; Elements of probability theory. Elements of statistical theory. Some general stochastic processes. Statistical failure models. System reliability. Reliability improvement. Maintainability and availability. Fault-tree analysis. Failure mode effect analysis. 
Reliability physics models. 

;;N.R. Mann, R.E. Schafer & N.D. Singpurwalla, Methods for Statistical Analysis of Reliability and Life Data, John Wiley & Sons, 1974. 
L.S. Srinath, Concepts of Reliability Engg., Affiliated East-Wast Press (P) Ltd., 1985. 
A.K. Govil, Reliability Engineering, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Co. Ltd., 1983. 
E. Balagurusmy, Reliability Engineering, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Co. Ltd., 1984. 
B.S. Dhillion, C. Singh, Engineering Reliability, John Wiley & Sons, 1980. 
M.L. Shooman, Probabilistic, Reliability, McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1968. 
P.D.T. Conor, Practical Reliability Engg., John Wiley & Sons, 1985. 
K.C. Kapur, L.R. Lamberson, Reliability in Engineering Design, John Wiley & Sons, 1977. 
;;
ME 666; Classification, design Methodology. LMTD and ENTU methods. Design of double-pipe, shell and tube heat exchanger, longitudinal and transverse fins, longitudinal conduction effects. Regenerators. Fired heaters. 
Transient Analysis, optimization, testing. 

;;S. Kokac, Heat Exchangers - Thermal Hydraulic Fundamentals and Design, Hemisphere; McGraw-Hill, 1981. 
D.Q. Kern and A.D. Kraus; Extended Surface Heat Transfer, McGraw-Hill, 1972. 
W.M. Kays and A.C. London, Compact Heat Exchangers, McGraw-Hill, 1962. 
;;
RE 602;Optimization techniques for systems reliability with redundancy. 
Heuristic methods applied to optimal system reliability. Dynamic programming applied to optimal system reliability. Discrete maximum principle applied to optimal system reliability. Sequential unconstrained minimisation techniques. Generalised reduced gradient method. Mwthod of Lagrangian multipliers & Kuhn-Tucker conditions applied to optimal system reliability. Generalized Lagrangian function. Geometric and integer programming methods applied to optimal system reliability Other methods to system reliability optimization problems. Determination of component reliability & redundancy for optimum system reliability. 

;;F.A. Tillman, C.L. Hwang & W. Kuo, Optimisation of systems Reliability, Marcel Dekker Inc. 1980. 
J.G. Rau, Optimisation and Probability in systems Engineering, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1970. 
;;
RE 603; Basic concepts, quality policy & objectives economics, economics of quality, Measurement and analysis of quality costs, Basic statistical concept of variation, Organisation for quality, design for effectiveness, reliability, statistical aids for planning and analysing tsts, quality specification, Statistical aids in limits and tolerances, manufacturing planning for quality. Statistical tools in manufacturing planning, inspection acceptance sampling, measurement vendor relations, statistical aids in vendor relations, process, motivation for quality, process control techniques, finished goods acceptance,control of product quality during customer relation, quality assurance, quality data systems, quality manuals, diagnosis techniques for quality improvement, quality control engineering. ;;A.V. Feigenbeum, Total Quality Control, McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1986. 
J.M. Juran and F.M. Gryna, Quality Planning and Analysis, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., Ltd., 1980. 
J.M. Juran and F.M. Gryna, Quality Control Hand Book, McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1988. 
J.R. Taylor, Quality Control Systems : Procedures for Planning Quality Programmes, McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1988. 
E.L. Grant and R.S. Leavenworth, Statistical Quality Control, McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1988. 
;;
RE 605; Point and interval estimation procedures for life time distributions. 
Testing reliability hypotheses. Bayes methods in reliability. Design & analysis of life test experiments. Accelerated life testing. 

Non-parametric methods. 

;;S.K. Sinha, Reliability and Life Testing, Wiley Eastern Ltd., 1986. 
K.C. Kapur and L.R. Lamberson, Reliability in Engineering Design, John Wiley and Sons, 1977. 
C. Lipson and N.J. Sheth, Statistical Design and Analysis of Engineering Experiments, McGraw-Hill Kogakusha Ltd., 1973. 
N.R. Mann, R.E. Schafer and N.D. Singapurwalla, Methods for Statistical Analysis of Reliability and Life Data, John Wiley and Sons, 1974. 
H.F. Martz and R.A. Waller, Bayesian Reliability Analysis, John Wiley & Sons, 1982.;;
RE 606;Maintenance Engineering Classification of Maintenance Systems - Basis and Models for Various Maintenance Systems. Optimal Strategies and Costing. Failure analysis - FTA and FMECA. Fault diagnosis and Trouble Shooting Systems. Condition Monitoring, Case studies of Various Engg. Systems. ;;L.T. Higgins and L.C. Marrow, Maintenance Engineering Hand Book, McGraw-Hill, 1977. 
A.K. Jardine, Operations Research in Maintenance, Manchester University Press, 1970. 
J.W. Foster, D.T. Phillips and T.R. Rogers, Reliability, Availability & Maintainability, M/A Press, 1981. 
T.R. Heintzelman, The Complete Hand Book of Maintenance Management, Prentice-Hall, 1976. 
J.D. Patton, Jr., Maintainability and Maintenance Management Instrument Society of America, 1980. 
;;
RE 608;Introduction to engineering design - design morphology - production process & material selection. Concept of load, strength optimization and safety. Reliability principles, product life cycle, design and development, risk reliability, product liability. Failure analysis techniques, Case histories of failures. Quality control. Design for maintenance. Ergonomics in design, Probabilistic concept in design. 
Cost evaluation and economic decision making. Case studies of reliability design process in allied engineering systems (Electrical, Aeronautical, Mechanical, Civil etc.) 

;;J.R. Dixon, Design Engineering, McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1986. 
G. Dieter, Engineering Design, McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1983. 
C.O. Smith, Introduction to Reliability in Design, McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1976. 
B.S. Dhillon, Quality Control and Reliability in Engineering Design, Marcel Dekker Inc., 1985. 
E.B. Haugan, Probabilistic Mechanical Design John Wiley and Sons, 1980. ;;
ME 671; Fules and suitability of fuels for use in S.I. Engines; Rating of S.I. Engines fuels; Carburettors and carburation; Petrol injection systems; Combustion in S.I. Engines normal and abnormal, detonation, stratification and lean mixture operations. Performance characteristics; Breathing capacity, pumping losses, friction losses; Design of induction and exhaust systems; Supercharging, design of combustion chamber. Air pollution by engine exhaust; Remedial measures; Digital simulation for performance prediction. 

;ME;L.C. Litchy, Combustion Engines Processes, McGraw-Hill, 1967. 
E.F. Obert, Internal Combustion Engines and Air Pollution , Intext Educational Publishers, 1973. 
H.R. Ricardo, The High Speed I.C. Engine, Blackie, London, 1969. 
;;
RE 609;Artificial intelligence, concepts, Knowledge representation Search strategies - Breadth first, Depth first, Dest first, Branch and Bound, A*, Fuzzy sets - Theory, linguistic variable, natural language, Pattern matching, Inference control - forward chaining, Conflict Resolution, Backward chaining, Mixed Strategy, Certainty factor, formal reasoning and linguistic variables. ;;1. S.J. Andriole and J. Stephen, Applications in Artificial Intelligence, Petrocelli Books, Princeton, N.J., 1985. 
2. P.H. Winston, Artificial Intelligence, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1984. 
3. Shutzer D., Artificial Intelligence An Application - Oriented Approach, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, NY, 1987. 
4. Bahrami A., Designing Artificial Intelligence based Software, Sigma Press - Wilmslow, 1992. 
;;
RE 610;Recent advances in reliability, availability and mainteinability of repairable redundant systems. Cost benefit analysis of systems subject to maintenance/repair. Case studies in failure analysis. 
;;S.K. Srinivasan and R. Subramanian, Probabilistic Analysis of Redundant Systems, Springer-Verlag, 1980. 
B.A. Kozlov, I.A. Ushakov, Reliability Handbook, Holt, Rinehart and Winston Inc., N.Y. 1970. 
;;
RE 612;Concepts in power systems,System reliability Review of methodologies in reliability eveluation, viz., network method, statespace method, etc. 
Review of existing reliability indices like LOLP, EDNS etc. Generation system planning, transmission system planning, interconnected systems planning, composite system reliability, economic aspects of reliability, maintainability, maintenance policies in power systems, case studies. 

;;R. Billinton, Power System Reliability Evaluation, Cordon and Breach, NY, 1970. 
J. Endrenyi, Reliability Modelling in Electric Power System, John Wiley and Sons, 1978. 
;;
ME 672; Review of energy sources and fossil fuels, role of Combustion in energy conservation, comprehensive treatment of combustion principles and their applications, laminar and turbulent flames, detonations, their propagation and structure, flame stability, turbulent combustion, chemical effects on turbulence, transition from laminar to turbulent diffusion flames, combustion of fuel droplets and liquid sprays. 

Pollution and environment. Formation and control of pollution in flames, engineering applications; Combustion process in SI Engines and C.I. Engines, gas turbine combustors, fluidized bed combustors, design of burners and Combustion chambers. 

;ME;N.A. Chigier, Energy, Combustion and Environment, McGraw- Hill Book Co, NewYork, 1981. 
I. Glassman, Combustion, Academic Press, New York, 1977. 
A. Murthy Kanury, Introduction to Combustion Phenomena, Gordon and Breach, New York, 1975. 
S.P. Sharma and Chander Mohan, Fuels and Combustion, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1984. 
;;
RE 613; Origins, Goals, Definitions, Fault Tolerance, Passive Hardward Redundancy, Active Hardware Redundancy, Hybrid Hardware Redundance, Information Redundancy, Time Redundancy, Software Redundancy, Evaluation of Reliability and Safety, Trade offs, Designs: TMR, TTMR, TDTMR, 5 MR, etc, Redundancy Techniques in VLSI environment, Yield Analysis, Test Pattern Gereration Design for Testing and Testability Analysis. 

;NIL;1. Pradhan D.K., Fault Tolerant Computing Theory and Techniques, Prentice-Hall, Englewook Cliffs, N.J. 1986. 
2. P.K. Lala, Fault Tolerant and Fault Testable Hardware Design, Prentice-Hall, Englewook Cliffs, N.J., 1985. 
3. B.W. Johnson, Design and Analysis of Fault Tolerant Digital Systems, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc. 1989. 
;;
RE 616;Economic factors. Design documentation - HIPO, data flow graphs, flow charts Wernier-Orr diagrams. Programming techniques structured, redundant, defensive top-down & bottom-up design, modular design. 
Complexity analysis - types heuristic measures, statistical approach, Sip"s law, software physics, Laemmel-Shooman"s estimates, Halsfeads estimates, number of errors and development time, cyclomatic complexity, knot complexity programme testing types,debugging techniques graph models, choice of test data,exhaustive testing software error nd faults, estimation of bugs, reliability and availability models. 

;;Martin L. Shooman, Software Engineering, Design, Reliability and Management, McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1987. 
John D. Mus, Anthony Iannino and Kazuhira Okumato, Software Reliability Measurement, Prediction, Application, McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1987. 
Thomas A. Thayer, Myron Lipow and Eldred C. Nelson, Software Reliability, TRW and North Holland Publishing Co., 1978. 
T. Anderson and B. Randell, Computing Systems Reliability, Cambridge University Press, 1979. 
G.J. Myers,Software Reliability - Principles and Practices, John Wiley and Sons, 1976. 
R.L. Glass, Software Reliability Guide Book, Prentice Hall Inc., NJ, 1979. 
;;
SC 403;Concept of System modelling : Physical, mathematical, dynamic modelling and dynamic analogies. 

Analog computer simulation : Basic analog computer components and operations amplitude and time scaling; solution of linear, non-linear and partial differential equations, as well as simultaneous equations. Formulation of model for a dynamic system and its simulation on analog computer. 

Digital computer simulation. Study of computer simulation languages like NIMMIC, CSMP, DSSP etc. and their use in system simulation. 

Introduction to hybrid computers and their use in system simulation. 

;NIL;;;
SC 601;Systems approach. Classification of inputs and models. Analytical and experimental methods of modelling: transform methods, impulse and frequency response, Fourier transform. Response to random inputs. 
State space models, Z transform. 

Pulse and random testing. Correlation technique. Pseudo/random signal testing parameter tracking. Regression and least square methods. 

Discretisation of distributed system. Examples of modelling of various types of systems 

;;E.O. Doeblin, System Modelling and Response, John Wiley & Sons, 1980. 
Desai and Lalwani, Identification Techniques, Tata McGraw Hill, 1977. 
;;
SC 602;(Equivalent EE 624) Basic concepts and classification. Identification techniques. 
Impulse response estimation. Parameter estimation. Learning model approach. 

Design of adaptive systems. Model reference adaptive systems. 

Adaptive autopilot systems. Some practical illustration. 
;;E. Mishkin and L. Braun, Adaptive Control Systems, McGraw Hill, 1967. 
Y.D. Landau, Adaptive Control, Marcel Dekker, 1979. 
P. Eykhoff, System Identification, John Wiley & Sons, 1974. 
;;
SC 604;(Equivalent EE 602) Introduction. Statement of the optimal control problem. Dynamic programming. Bellman equations. Variational calculus. Dynamic optimization without constraints. Euler Lagrange equation and transversality conditions. The problems. The problems of Bolza, Mayer and their solution. Pontryagin"s maximum principle. Computational methods in optimal control. Rayleigh-Ritz method. Parametric expansion method. State increment dynamic programming. Gradient method. Method of steepest descent. Quasilinearization and invariant embedding. ;;D.Kirk, Optimal Control - An Introduction, Prentice Hall, 1970 ;;
SC 606;Mathematics of Reliability, Reliability function, Models of failure. Failure data Analysis, System reliability. Series configuration. Parallel configuration r-out-of-n structure. 
Reliability improvement. Redundancy. Reliability allocation. 

Reliability testing. 

;;M.L. Shooman, Probabilistic Reliability - An Engineering Ap- proach, McGraw-Hill Publ. Co. 
;;
SC 607;(Equivalent CL 603) Survey of optimization problems and their classification. Necessary and sufficient conditions for unconstrained optima. Linear and geometric programming. Search methods for unconstrained and constrained optimization. Discrete minimum principle and dynamic programming. Optimization of multistage processes. ;;G.S.G.Beveridge and R.S.Schechter, Optimization Theory and Practice, McGraw Hill, 1970. 
M.Aoki, Introduction to Optimization Techniques, 1972. ;;
SC 608;Feedback control of linear distributed parameter systems (DPS)* reduction of distributed system to lumped systems. Lumping techniques Laplace transforms in time, method of characteristics, Model analysis. 
Controllability and stabilizability Optimal feedback control of linear DPS:the linear quadratic problem. 

Controller design methods for nonlinear DPS. Introduction to control of systems having time delays. Observer for DPS. State and Parameter estimation of DPS. Optimal location of measurement point. DPS control design case studies. 

;;W.H.Rey, Advances Process Control, McGraw Hill, 1981. 
W.H. Rey and D.G. Lainiotis, Distributed Parameter Systems, Marcel-Dekker, N.Y.1978. ;;
SC 609;Equivalent ME 3701 Need for optimization and historical development. Classification and formulation of optimization problem, classical optimization methods: Differential calculus. Lagrangian theory, Kuhn Tucker conditions. 
Unconstrained minimization techniques; one dimensional minimization; Fibonnacci, Golden section and quadratic interpolation methods. 

Multi-dimensional minimization. Univariate, conjugate direction, gradient and variable metric methods. Constrained minimization techniques. Penalty function methods, feasible direction and gradient projection method. Introduction to geometric programming. 

Linear programming and simplex method. Examples and applications of the above methods in the recent engineering design literature. 

;;S.S.Rao, Optimization - Theory and Applications Wiley Eastern Ltd., 1978. 
R.L. Box, Optimization Methods for Engineering Design, Addision Wesley, 1971. 
W.I.Zangwill, Non-linear Programming - A Unified Approach, Prentice Hall, 1969. ;;
SC 610;Methodology of System Engineering - Some generalized problem solving solving solving solving techniques. Structured and unstructured methods. Morphological, input-output and function analysis and design methods. Delphi method. Brain storming, scenario writing. 
System models in engineering and other cybernetic models. 

Multilevel system models. Computeraided of engineering and management systems. (The students will be trained to construct models and analyze systems in the above area). 

;;M.Achutan, System: Theory, Design and Engineering. 
J.W.Fonester, Industrial Dynamics, MIT Press 1972. 
M.Inbar and S.C.Stoll, Simulation and Gaming in Social Sciences 1972. 
;;
SC 611;(Equivalent EE 623) Linear and piecewise linear approximation Harmonic linearisation. 
Describing functions analysis. Dual input describing functions and signal stabilization. Phase plane analysis, singular points in the phase plane. Various notions of stability, definition and tests. 

Liapunove"s second method and its use for optimization. Dur"s cannonical form. Popov"s stability criterion. 
;;D.Graham and D.McRuer, Analysis of Non-linear System, John Wiley, 1961. 
J.E.Gibson, Non-linear automatic control, McGraw Hill, 1963. 
N.Minorsky, Introduction to Non-linear Systems, Van Nostrand, 1967. 
;;
SC 613;(Equivalent EE 621) Multivariable system models. State equations canonical forms. 
Polynomial matrices. Minimal realizations. 

Multivariable system design: Pole placement decoupling, model matching, inverse Nyquist array, characteristic locus methods. 

;;Y.S.Apte, Linear Multivariable Control Systems, Tata McGraw Hill, 1981. 
H.H. Rosenbrock, Computer Aided Control System Design, Academic Press, 1974. 
D.H. Owens, Feedback and Multivariable Systems, Peter Peregrinus, 1978. 
W.M. Wonham, Linear Multivariable Control 2nd ed. Springer Ver lag, 1979. 
F.Fallside, Control System Design by Pole Zero Assignment, Academic Press.1977. 
;;
SC 620;Basic concepts and techniques. Control modes. Tuning procedures. 
Special feedback techniques. Direct synthesis and adaptive control. 

Multiple feedback controllers. Decoupling and feed-forward methods. 

Microprocessor controllers. Fault tolerance and optimizing processes. 

Process control computers. 
;;M.Morari and T.J. McAvoy, Chemical Process Control - CPC iii CACHE/Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1986. 
F.G. Shinskey, Process Control Systems, McGraw Hill, 1979. 
;;
SC 621; First 
Semester (beginning July, 1993) Introduction to feedback properties. Single and two degree of freedom configuration. Properties of loop transmission functions, specifications. 

Basic QFT procedure for SISO LTI systems: Single-loop and multipleloop structures.Plant modification. Existence theorems. The nonlinear QFT procdure. Extensions to time varying plants. Modified procedures for reduced overdesign-Existemce theorems. 

The MIMO (Multi-input output) QFT synthesis techniques. Existence theorems.Recent MIMO QFT developments. 
;Basic;I.M. Horowitz, Synthesis of Feedback systems, Academic Press, 1963. 
J.D. "Azzo and C. Houpis, Linwar Control System analysis and Design: Conventional and Modern, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1988. 
Selected papers from Technical Jouranals. 
;;
SC 622;Quantitative Feedback Theory I 
Synthesis for highly uncertain nonlinear MIMO plants, Multipleloop MIMO feed-back systems. Distributed parameters systems. The Singular-G technique for nonminimum phase and unstable systems. 

Single and multiple-loop dithered adaptive systems. Special class of FORE nonlinear compensation. Design for hard robust feedback methodologies. 

;SC 621;J.D. "Azzoa nd C. Houpis, Linear Control System Analysis and Design: Conventional and Modern McGraw-Hil N.. 1988. 
;;
SC 623;The linear-Quadrtic problem-formulation and solution; LQG problem; Frequency domain interpretations; loop transfer recovery; robustness issues; H2 optimization; small gain theorem; H6 optimality-motivation,the standard set up. Co-prime factorization, the model-matching problem, state space solutions. 

;Classical Control th;Kwakernak and Sivan Linear Optimal Control, jon Wiley, 1972. 
Anderson and Moore Linear Optimal Control_Prentice-Hall 1990 B.A. 
Francis A Course in Hoo Control Theory-Springer Verlag 1987. 
;;
SC 625;Contents: rings, fields, vector spaces, dependence, isomorphism, dimension, linear transformations, adjoints, projections, rank and nullity, linear differential equations, matrix exponentials, adjoint equations, controllability, observability, realization theory, Mcmillan degree, signals and normed vector spaces. ;;1. Finite Dimensional Vector Spaces - P.R. Halmos (East West Press, 1958) 
2. Finite Dimensional Linear Systems - R.W. Brockett (John Wiley and sons, 1970.) 
;;
ME 674; Suitability of fuels for C.I. Engines. Rating of fuels. Fuel additives. 

Theory of combustion and other working processes. Heat release rate calculations. Injection equipment design and injection process combustion. 

Chamber design and matching with fuel injection parameters. 

Induction and exhaust systems. Effect of altitude and ambient conditions on engine performance parameters. Mechanical losses and mechanical efficiency. Supercharging and engine performance. Other waste heat utilisation practices, Engine emissions. 

;ME;A.S. Khatchiian; Theory of C.I. Engine Vol.1 and 2 IIT Bombay, 1966. 
C.F. Taylor and E.S. Taylor; Internal Combustion Engine, Stanton, 1961. 
P.G. Burman and B. Luca, Fuel Injection and Controls of Internal Combustion Engines, Technical Press, 1962. 
;;
ME 681; Refrigeration cycles: need for refrigeration, various refrigeration cycles, vapour compression cycles, single-stage, two-stage and cascade, vapour absorbtion cycles, LiBr/H2O and NH3/H2O, gas cycles and air liquifaction cycles, selection of refrigerants and refrigerant/absorbent combination; Advanced psychometrics: psychometric charts, thermodynamic properties of moist air, typical air conditioning processes and associated energy calculations. 
Introduction to advanced refrigeration cycles: vapour compression cycles with solution circuits, cogeneration of power and refrigeration, refrigeration using solar energy and waste heat. 

;;1993 ASHRAE Handbook - Fundamentals. 
J.L. Threlkeld, Thermal Environmental Engineering, Prentice Hall, 1970. 
Manufacturers literature and handouts. 
;;
ME 682; Laws of thermodynamics. energy, entropy and energy. Use of different efficiency expressions and coefficients. Heat balance method - merits and demerits Equivalent Carnot cycle method and entropy increase method. Energy of matter and Energy, exergy calculatons, exergetic efficiency, exergy charts. Exergy balance. Analysis of exergy losses. 
Component wise exergy and entropy flow diagrams. Specific applications to the analysis of power stations, refrigeration installations, Cryogenic systems and small capacity units. 

;;S. Zagit and R. Petela, Exergy, Moscow Publications. 
Exergy Analysis of Thermal Systems - Lecture Notes. 
;;
ME 683;Historical background and applications. Gas liquifaction systems. Gas - separation and gas-purification systems. Cryogenic refrigeration systems. Storage and handling of cryogens. Cryogenic insulations. 
Liquefied natural. 

Gas-properties of materials of low temperatures. Material of construction and techniques of fabrication. Instrumentation. 

Ultra-low temperature techniques. Application. 

;;R. Barron, Cryogenic Systems, McGraw-Hill, 1966. 
Lecture Notes Summer School in Advances in Cryogenics Engineering, 1977. 
Lecture Notes Short Term courses on Role of Cryogenics and Refrigeration in Food Preservation, 1977. 
;;
ME 684; Load estimating: comfort conditions, weather data, solar heat gain, cooling and heating loads. 
Airconditioning systems: central and unitary systems, duct design and fan selection, heating and cooling coil design, cooling tower design and selection, air cleaners and scrubbers, hydronic heating and cooling systems, humidification and dehumidification equipement, automatic controls, noise reduction. 

Energy conservation and air conditioning for special applications: waste heat, recovery, cogeneration of power and refrigeration, industrial air conditioning, textile processing, clean spaces. 

;;1993 ASHRAE Handbook - Fundamentals. 
1992 ASHRAE Handbook - HVAC Systems and Equipment. 
Manufacturers literature and handouts. 
;;
ME 688; Introduction, characteristics and classification of fluid power generators, fluid motors and kinematics of fluid cylinders, basic circuit components and their symbols, symbols development, international and indian Standards, fluid Power circuits and their design, intensifiers and accumulators, heat in fluid power systems, three way and four way valve analysis, pneumatics in industry. 
Compressor installation practice, steady analysis of pneumatic components, pressure regulators, analysis of spherical, conical and butterfly valves, pneumatic actuators fluidics, wall attachment devices, proportional and vortex amplifiers, biomedical applications of fluidics. 

;;J.J. Pippenger and R.M. Koff- Fluid Power Controls (McGraw-Hill). 
C.A. Belsterling Fluidic System Design (Wiley Interscience) 
B.W. Andersen The analysis and design of pneumatic systems. (Wiley). 
;;
ME 692; Fundamental principles of large boiler design. Influence of steam parameters, size of units and block arrangements. Types of furnaces. 
Arrangement of heating surfaces. Temperature of the fuel gases at exit of furnace and heat load distribution over radiant and convective heating surfaces. Burners and their disposition. Fuel preparation and combustion. Heat balance and draught balance. Types of heat absorbing surfaces and their thermal properties. Boiler fouling and methods to control it. Natural and assisted circulation. Drum internals. Once through boilers (supercritical and subcritical), types of economisers, preheaters and reheaters, their location and deisgn. Composite design of a large radiant water wall steam boiler. 
;;R. Dolezal, Large Boiler Furnaces, Elsevier, 1967. 
Modern Power Station Practice, Vol.2, C.E.G. Board, 1971. 
;;
ME 693; Power plant cycles. Cycle analysis and design losses in steam turbines. Design of a stage. Design of multistage axial flow turbines. Vortex flow and low pressure stage design. Performance at varying loads governing, experiments on turbine cascades. Calculation of design point efficiency using cascade data. Short analysis of potential flow methods for flow through turbine blade cascade. ;;K.J. Salisbury, Steam Turbines and their Cycles, 1950. 
W.J. Kearton, Steam Turbine Theory and Practice, Pitman, 1958. 
;;
ME 701; Need for optimization and historical development. Classification and formulation of optimisation problem, classical optimization methods Differential calculus, Lagrangian theory, Kuhn Tucker condition. 
Unconstrained minimization techniques, one dimensional minimization techniques, one dimensional minimization, Fibonnacci, Goldern section and quadratic interpolation methods. Multi- dimensional minimisation, Univariate, Conjugate direction, gradient and variable metric methods. Constrained minimization techniques, penalty function methods, feasible direction and gradient projection method. 

Introduction to geometric programming, linear programming and simplex method. Examples and applications of the above methods in the recent engineering design literature. 

;;S.S. Rao, Optimization - Theory and Applications, Wiley Eastern Ltd, 1978. 
R.L. Fox, Optimization Methods for Engineering Design, Addison Wesley, 1971. 
W.I. Zangwill, Non-Linear Programming, A Unified Approach, Prentice Hall, 1969. 
;;
ME 702; Experimental Planning; Preliminary, intermediate and final stages in experimental investigations. Selection of instruments based on static, dynamic characteristics and allowable errors. Analysis of experimental data, curve fitting, report writing. 
Calibration of measuring devices commonly used in Thermal Engineering. Estimates of error in the measurement of common parameters. 

Experimental project. Planning and execution of an open ended experiment. Analysis of data and reporting. 

;;J.P. Holman, Experimental Methods for Engineers, McGraw- Hill, 1978. 
E.O. Doebelin; Measurement Systems; Application and Design, McGraw-Hill, 1976. 
;;
ME 704; Introduction, numerical integration, solution to algebraic equations, solution to ordinary differential equations, application to conduction, radiation and flow processes. Solution to partial differential equations, application to conduction, convection and flow problems. 
Difference forms, implicit and explicit methods for steady state and transient problems. Accuracy stability, speed of convergence, etc. 

Governing relation and boundary conditions. Solution to conduction problems. Convective problems in laminar and turbulent flows. Choice of governing equations and solution methods.
;;Kreiszig, E., Advanced Engineering Mathematics, John Wiley. 
Scarborough, J.B., Numerical Mathematical Analysis, Oxford OBH Publishing Co. 
Anderson, J.A., Tannehill, J.C. and Pletcher, R.H., Computational Fluid Mechanics and Heat Transfer, Hemisphere Publishing Co. 
Patankar, S.V., Numerical Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow, Hemisphere Publishing Co. ;;
ME 705;Introduction to basic concepts Theory of Plasticity, Yield criteria (isotropic), Hot, cold & warm working, Bulk forming like Rolling, Forging, Extrusion & Wiredrawing, Analytical techniques like Upper bound, Equilibrium (slab) and Slip line field analysis. 
Forming tools Tools and dies for forging, Design of rolls for rolling, Extrusion dies. 

Forming Equipments Presses & Hammers, Speed characteristics of drives, Safety mechanisms, Selection of equipment for forming process, Rolling mills, Elements of a rolling mill,Roll pass design. 

Latest trends: Forming from mashy stage, Isothermal forging, New net shape manufacturing. 

;;Soc. of Mfg Engrs., Die Design Handbook, SME Publications, Michigan, 1990. 
Sabaroff, A.M., et al., Forging Material and Practices, Reinhold Publishers, 1968. 
Pearson, C, Extrusion of Metals, Parkins .R., Wiley, NY, 1960. 
Lange, K., Handbook of Metal Forming, McGraw Hill, 1985. 
Johnson, W. and Mellor P.B., Plasticity for Mechanical Engineers. Van Nostrand, London, 1972. 
;;
ME 707;Metal casting processes Part and Tool materials, Foundry layout and Equipment, Patterns and cores. 
Melt flow Flow in gating channels and mold cavity, Fluidity, Gating systems, Flow analysis. 

Solidification: Heat transfer, Shrinkage, Feeding, Growth structures, Simulation. 

Casting defects Types, Attributes, Causes and Remedies, Inspection techniques, Expert System. 

Plastics for molding Types, Chemical composition and Structures, Polymerization, Synthesis techniques. 

Processing methods Calendering, Injection, Compression, Blow, Extrusion and Transfer molding, Casting and Reaction injection molding. 

Plastic flow in a mold Pressure and Shear stress distribution, Gating layout, Cooling analysis. 

CAD/CAM for casting and molding: review of existing packages.
;;Heine, R.W., Loper, C.R. & Rosenthal, P.C., Principles of Metal Casting, McGraw Hill, New York, 1976. 
Mukherjee, P.C., Fundamentals of Metal Casting Technology. Oxford and IBH Publ. Co., 1979 
Dubois J. H. and Pribble W.I., Plastics Mold Engineering Hand book, Van Nonstrand Reinhold, New York, 1987. 
Street A.C., The Die Casting Book, Portcullis Press Ltd, Surrey England, 1986. 
;;
ME 708; Systems and Models. Types of models, characteristics of models. 
Model equations and their formulations. Analysis of models. 

Device Modelling Models of work transfer and heat transfer devices. 

System Models Development of Models for power plants and refrigerating systems. Analysis of System models, steady-state and transient characteristics. Analysis as a tool for control and optimization. 
;;Dolezal and Varcop L. Process Dynamics. Elsevier, 1970. 
Bear J.M. Aghan N.H and Heat Transfer in flames. John-Wiley and Sons, 1974. 
F.S. Taylor and Taylor E.S, I.C. Engines International Text Book. 1962. 
Hutchinson F.W., Design of air conditioning systems, The Industrial Press, 1958. 
;;
ME 709;Introduction to metal joining processes, Heat sources for joining of metals Metallurgy of welding, Heat treatment, Residual stresses and Stress relief methods. 
Welding processes - Process parameters - Selection and Control. Welding consumables, Welding equipments. Metal transfer and Heat flow in different welding processes. Joint design and Design of weldments. 

Adhesive bonding, Brazing, Soldering of metals. Welding defects: Causes and Remedies. Destructive and Non destructive inspection of welds. 

Recent trends in joining of materials (including Plastics, Ceramics). 

;;Udin, Wulf and Funk Welding for Engineers. Wiley, New York, 1954. 
Lancaster, J.F., Metallurgy of Welding, Brazing and Soldering. George Allen & Unwin, London, 1985. 
Cary Howard, Modern Welding Technology, Prentice Hall, 1979. 
Houldcroft, P.T., Welding Process Technology, Cambridge Univ Press, 1985. 
Cagle, C.V., Handbook of Adhesive Bonding, McGraw Hill, New York, 1973. 
;;
ME 710;Review of lumped parameter modelling of vibrations. Vibrations of continuous systems-bars, beams and plates. Flexural and torsional vibrations. Classical and approximate methods of analysis. Vibration experimentation. Standard vibration test set-up. Vibration exciters and pickups. Advanced vibration analysis. Introduction to self-excited, non-industrial and random vibrations. Some case studies of industrial problems. Demonstration of some experiments in the vibrations laboratory. ;;J.P. Den Hartog, Mechanical Vibrations, McGraw Hill Book Co., New York, 1958. 
S. Timoshenko Vibration problems in Engineering, Wiley, 1974. 
Francis S. Tse. Ivan E. Morse, Rolland T. Hinkle Mechanical Vibrations, CBS Publishers & Distributors 1983. 
W. Ker Wilson Practical Solution of Torsional Vibration Problems, Chapman and Hall, 1969. 
C.M. Harris, C.E. Crede Shock and Vibration Hand Book, McGraw Hill Book Co., 1988. 
;;
ME 711;Overview of manufacturing systems and various issues of interest: Assembly Line, Repetitive batch manufacturing, Cellular manufacturing, FMS, JIT, CIM. Preplanning: Forecasting, Economic analysis, Aggregate planning, Capacity planning, Inventory planning. 
Decision making in design of manufacturing systems: Group technology, Line balancing, Plant layout. 

Operations planning: MRP, MRP II, Hierarchical planning systems, JIT systems, FMS. Operation and control: Lot sizing decisions, Production scheduling, Line of balance, Quality planning and control, Cost planning and control. 

Simulation analysis of manufacturing systems. Case studies. 

;;Bedworth, D.D. and J.E.Bailey, Integrated Production Control, System - Management, Analysis and Design. John Wiley, 1983. 
Elsayed E.A. and Boucher T.O., Analysis and Control of Production Systems. Prentice Hall, 1985. 
King J.R., Production Planning and Control, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1975. 
Bestwick, P.F and Lockyer, K., Quantitative Production Management, Pitman Publications, 1982. 
Hax, A.C and Candea, D., Production and Inventory Management. Prentice Hall, 1984. 
Johnson, L.A and Momtgomery, D.C., O.R. in Production Planning, Scheduling and Inventory Control. John Wiley and Sons, 1974. 
Korgaonkar, M.G., JIT Manufacturing, Macmillan Publication Co, 1992. 
;;
ME 712;Evolution of Numerical control, NC, CNC, DNC. Classification of CNC machines, Machine configurations, Types of control, CNC controllers characteristics, Interpolators. 
Programming CNC machines, Part print analysis and Process planning, Preparatory(G) and Miscellaneous(M) codes. Advanced Programming features - Canned cycles, Subroutines, Macros, special cycles etc. 

Manual part programming for CNC turning, milling, Wire EDM machines. 

Computer assisted part programming techniques - Conversational and Graphics based software, Solids based part programming. Freeform surface machining. 

Simulation and Verification of CNC programs, Adaptive CNC control techniques. Integration of CNC machines for CIM. 

;;Krar, S., and Gill, A., CNC Technology and Programming, McGraw Hill publ Co, 1990. 
Gibbs, D., An Introduction to CNC Machining, Casell, 1987. 
Seames, W.S., Computer Numerical Control Concepts and Programming, Delmar Publishers, 1986. 
Lynch, M., Computer Numerical Control for Machining, McGraw Hill, 1992. 
;;
ME 714;Introduction to CIM, Basic building blocks of CIM, CNC machines, Tool handling systems, Material handling systems. 
CNC machines types, classification, File formats, Controllers, Distributed NC, Hierarchical control, Issues in file transfer and integration, Tooling on CNC, Fixtures on CNC. Material handling and storage systems like Robots, AGVS, systems, AS/RS etc., Development for total material handling system. 

Automatic inspection systems use of CMM, Communication systems, Links in the network, Computer control systems. 

From product design to manufacturing, Introduction to GT, CAPP, Scheduling, MRP, Flexible cell, FMS system design, development and utilization, Computer simulation of FMS, Packages available, Illustrative examples. 

Product data management for CIM. Integration of the production management and business functions for CIM. 

;;Paul G. Ranky, The Design and operation of FMS, I.F.S publ, 1983. 
Harrington, J., C.I.M., Krieger, 1979. 
Richard Stover, An analysis of CAD/CAM Application with introduction to C.I.M., Prentice Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 
David Bedworth, et al., Computer Integrated Design and Manufacturing, McGraw Hill, 1991. 
Scholz. B. & Reiter, C.I.M Interfaces, Chapman & Hall, 1992. 
David L. Goetsch, Fundamental of CIM technology, Delmar publication, 1988. 
;;
ME 716;Non Traditional processes Classification, Areas of application. 
Electric Discharge Machining Principle , Process parameters, EDM machines and controls, Wire-cut EDM, Process optimisation and control, Tool design for EDM. Abrasive and Water jet machining Mechanism of material removal, Process parameters, Process capabilities. 

High energy beam processes like Laser beam machining, Electron beam machining, Plasma arc machining. 

Chemical and allied processes like Chemical machining, Electro chemical machining Principle of Ultrasonic machining, capabilities and application. 

;;H.M.T.- Production Technology, Tata-McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1980. 
Pandey, P.C. and Shan, Modern Machining Processes, Tata-McGraw Hill Publ. Co. Ltd., New Delhi, 1980. 
McGeough, J.A., Advanced Methods of Machining Chapman and Hall, London, 1988. 
Wilson J.F., Practice and Theory of Electrochemical Machining, Wiley Inter Science, New York, 1971. 
Davidson, A. (Editor), Handbook of Precision Engineering, Vol 1-12, MacMillan Publ., London, 1970.;;
ME 718;Introduction: Relationship between part and tool for various processes like Sand casting, Die casting, Injection molding, Powder metallurgy, etc. 
Tool Materials: Types, Properties, Selection criteria, Tool manufacturing techniques. 

Mold/Die Layout: Orientation, Parting line and Parting surface, Cavity number and Layout. 

Gating System: Types, Design of Sprue, Runner and Gates - Location and Dimensioning. 

Feeding System: Number, Location and Dimensions of Feeders/Risers, Application of feed aids. 

Cores: Holes and Undercuts, Core support. 

Cooling system: Design of cooling passages and flow rates for permanent molds. 

Allowances: Draft, Fillet, Shrinkage, Machining and Distortion allowance. 

Auxiliary devices: Ejection and Guiding system, Mold plates, Mold assembly. 

CAD/CAM of molds: Standard parts database, Analysis, Stress, Flow, Solidification and Cooling simulation, Tool Design and Manufacture. 

;;Cox, L.L., Advanced Pattern Making, The Technical Press, London, 1958. 
Street, A.C., The Die Casting Book, Portcullis Press Ltd, Surrey, England, 1986. 
Pye, R.G.W., Injection Mold Design Longman Scientific and Technical, Essex, England, 1989. 
;;
ME 720;Product life cycle, Need for innovation, Management issues, Product specifications Market research, Quality Function Deployment, Standardisation. 
Creativity techniques: Sources, Developing new product features, Aesthetic and Ergonomics, Reducing costs and Development time: Value Analysis, Design for manufacture and assembly, Process selection and simulation, Concurrent engineering, Rapid prototyping techniques. 

Product engineering data management Techniques 

;;Hollins, B., and Pugh, S., Successful Product Design. Butterworths, London, 1990. 
Baldwin, E.N. and Niebel, B.W., Designing for Production, Edwin, Homewood, Illinios, 1975. 
Jones, J.C., Design Methods, Seeds of Human Futures, John Wiley, New York, 1978. 
Bralla, J.G., Handbook of Product Design for Manufacture, McGraw Hill, New York, 1988. 
;;
ME 735;Role of Computer Graphics in CAD/CAM. Configuration of graphic workstations, Fundamentals of 2D graphics Menu design and Graphical User Interfaces (GUI), Customisation and Parametric programming. 
Vector representation of geometric entities, Homogeneous coordinate systems, Geometric transformations. Planar and Space curve design Analytical and Synthetic approaches, Parametric and Implicit equations. 

Modeling of biparametric freeform surfaces Coons, Bezier, B-spline and NURBS surface patches, Surface manipulation techniques. 

Geometric modeling techniques Wireframes, B-Rep, CSG and Hybrid modellers, Feature based, Parametric and Variational modeling. 

Introduction to product data standards and data structures Database integration for CIM. 

;;Rogers, D.F. and Adams, A., Mathematical Elements for Computer Graphics, McGraw Hill Inc, NY, 1989. 
Faux, I.D. and Pratt, M.J., Computational Geometry for Design and Manufacture, John Wiley & sons, NY, 1979. 
Mortenson, M.E., Geometric Modeling, John Wiley & sons, NY, 1985. Choi, B.K., Surface Modeling for CAD/CAM, John Wiley & sons, NY, 1991. 
;;
ME 742;Electric Discharge Machining Principles, basic constituents machines, dielectric, power supply control, electrodes, no wear KDM and wire cut KDM, KDM for die sinking applications, process capabilities, economics. 
Electro Chemical Machining Basic principles - equipment and process details, power supply control electrolyte, control, tools or electrodes, process capabilities, applications, problem areas, economics. 

Ultrasonic Machining Basic principles, equipment and process details, work piece, tool holders, tools, process capabilities, economics. 

Abrasive and Water Jet Machining Principles, equipment, process details, nozzles, process capabilities, economics. 

High Energy Beam Machining Processes Principles equipment process details, and process capabilities and economics of electron beam, laser beam, and plasma arc machining processes. 

Machining of Refractory Hard Materials Including that of ceramics, and composites problems and techniques with applications. 
;;Metals Handbook, Vol.16, Machining 9th Edition, A.S.M.Metals Park, Ohio (1988) 
Production Technology-HMT Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi (1980) 
Handbook of Precision Engineering, Vol.4, Physical and Chemical Fabrication Techniques, Philips Technical Library. 
Journals: 
Precision Engineering, Annals of CIRP, Manufacturing Engineer, Int. J. of Machine Tool Design and Research, Machine Design 
;;
ME 744;Single Degree of Freedom systems and Multi Degree of Freedom Systems. 
Statistical properties of random processes, level crossing analysis, Response of linear systems to random vibrations. 

Single processing, Aliasing, basic lag and spectral windows, smoothing spectral estimates Transducers and Instrumentation, FFT analyzers, data acquisition systems. 

Failure by fatigue due to random vibration. 
;;N.C. Nigam, Introduction to Random Vibration, MIT Press, 1983 
D.E. Newland, Random Vibration and Spectral Analysis, Longman, 1984 
S.H. Crandall and W.D. Mark, Academic Press, 1973 
I. Elishakoff, Probabilistic Methods in the Theory of Structures, Wiley, 1983 
R.W. Clough and J. Penzien, Dynamics of Structures, McGraw Hill, International Edition, Second Edition, 1993.;;
ME 746;Drives: Tyre track interaction, resistances drive capacities and thresholds. Drive characteristics and economics brake systems including anti-clock braking. 
Vibrations: Description of random road roughness. Single point and multipoint excitation models. Passenger comfort. Effect of wheel mounting and stabilization. 

Steer dynamics: Linear and nonlinear models constant speed circular run. Oversteer and understeer concepts. Streer and overturning instability (three wheeler included). Transients in the velocity vector. 

Ergonomics: Driver vehicle road interaction. 

;;J.Y. Wong, Theory of ground vehicles, Wiley Interscience, 1978. 
D. Bastou, Car Suspension and Handling, Penteeh Press, 1990. 
D.P. Moore, The friction of pneumatic tyre, Elsevier, 1975. 
M.D. Artamonov and others, Motor vehicles fundamentals and design, Mir Publ., 1976. 
K. Newton and W. Steeds, The motor vehicle, Butterworth, 1989. 
C.E. Crede, Shock and Vibration Handbook, McGraw Hill, 1988. 
M.J. Griffin, Handbook of human vibrations, Academic Press, London, 1990. 
;;
GS 651;  Distribution of ore deposits  in space and time: ore types amd crustal evolution. Design of exploration and objectives. Prospecting criteria amd selection of areas for exploration during reconnaissance and initial follow -up. Geological detting and prospecting criteria for important deposits. Gold deposits, massive sulfide deposits, porphyry copper deposits, tin-tungsten deposits associated with acid magmatism, Mississipi Valley type deposits, reanium deposits. Integration of data sets for evatuation of mineral potential.
Geological aspects of drilling: borehole location, planning of drilling operations, borehole surveys, correction of deviated boreholes and directional drilling, core sampling and assaying. Economic classification of mineral resources. calculation of in situ reserves from bore hole data. Underground sampling and calculaion of blocked reserves. Introduction to geostatistical estimation of reserves.;;Peters, W.C.Exploration and mining geology, (2nd ed.), John wiley, NY 1987.

Chugh, C.P. High technology in drilling and exploration, Oxford and IBH, New Delhi, 1992. 

Rose,A.W. Hawkes,H.E. and webb, J.S. Geochemistry in mineral exploration, Academic Press, London, 1979.

Kuzwart, M. and Bohmer,M. Prospecting and exploration of mineral deposits, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1986.

Edwards, R.P. and Atkinson, K. Ore deposit geology and its influence on mineral exploration, Chapman & Hall, N.Y. 1986.

Evans, A.M. Introduction to mineral exploration, Blackwell Science, Oxford, 1955.

;;
GS 652;Topology, structure plate tectonic settings, sediments, geological history of the ocean basins and continental margins. Physio-chemical properties of sea waters, sediments geological history of the ocean basins and continental margins. Physio-chemical properties of sea waters, sediment-water, rock water interactions. Continental shelves - phosphorites, barites, organic sediments, placer deposits, evaporites and carbonated, vein deposits, oil and gas. Deep-sea floor - sediments, morphology, chemistry and genesis of Mn-Fe nodules. Hydrotherma; mineral deposits and hot brines of convergent and divergent plates, intraplate deposits of orogenic belts. Radioactive methods for dating sediments and Mn-nodules. Review of selected topics in ocean mining methods , legal and environmental aspects of mining.;;Mero, J.L. Mineral resources of the sea, Elsevier, 1977.

Seibold,E. and Berger,W.H. The seafloor Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1982.

Shepherd,F.P. Submarine grology, Harper & Row, N.Y. 1973.

Turekian,K.K. Oceans, Prentice Hall,N.J. 1976.;;
GS 653;Origin and composition of petroleum and natural gas: source rocks, reservoir rocks amd traps. Migration and accumulation of oil and gas. types of petroliferous basins and their relation to hydrocarbons potential. Geographic and stratigraphic distributions of oil and gas. Surface indications and direct detection of hydrocarbons. Sub-surface geological methods and brief idea about geologic interpretations of seismic data. Drilling methods, drilling equipments, drilling fluids, well-logs. Estimation of reserves and resources.
;;Tissot,B.P. and Welte,D.H. Petroleum formation and occurance (II edition), Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1984.

Tearpock,D.J. and Bischke,R.E. Applied sub-surface geologiccal mapping, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1991.

Jenyon,M.K. Oil and gas traps, John Wiley & Sons,N.Y. 1990.

Magara,K. Geological models of petroleum entrapment, Elseveir, 1986.

Shanon,P.M. and Naylor,D. Petroleum basin studies, Graham & Trotman, London, 1989.

Lerche,I. and Thomson,R.O. Hydrodynamism
of oil and gas, Plenum Press,N.Y, 1984.

Hunt J.M. Petroleum geochemistry and grology,W.H. Fruman & Co. 1979.;;
GS 654;Introduction to the problem of estimation of spatial variables, block grade estimation: effect of support, regionalized variables, random functions and the probablistic formulation of the problem. Spatial law of the random function and hypothesis of stationarity, strict, second order and intrinsic stationarity. Linear estimators, unbiasedness, bariance of estimation and dispersion variance. Experimental variograms and modelling, anisotropy. Regulation. Auxilliary functions. Ordinary kriging. Estimation of global mean and variance. 

Coregionalisation, cokriging,non-stationary random funtions and universal kriging.

Introducion to non- conditional and conditional simulation of mineral deposits.

Concept of recoverable reserves, global gradetonnage curves. Introductionto non-linear geostatistics.
;;Journal, A.G. and Huijbregts, Ch. Mining geostatistics, Academic Press, London, 1978.

David,M. Geostatistical ore reserve estimation, Elsevier, 1977.

Isaaks,E.A. and Srivastava, R.M. An introduction to geostatistics, Oxford Univ. Press, 1990.

Rivoitstf,J. Inntroduction to disjunctive kriging and non-linear geostatistics, Clarendon, Oxford, 1994.

Kitanidis, P.K. Introduction to geostatistics, Applications in hydrogeology, Cambridge Univ. Press, Campridge,1997

Annels,A.E. (Ed.) Casehistories and methods in mineral reserve evaluation, GeolSoc. London, 1992.
;;
GS 655;Hydrologic cycle components and the data presentation - precipitation, evapo-transpiration, run-off, stream flow, lakes, infiltration, and ground-water reservoirs. 

Groundwater flow and determination of formation parameters - pumping and injection tests. Quality of groundwater and surface water, saline water intrusion. Construction, design and performance of wells. Groundwater modelling, watershed management and related environmental aspects.;;Karanth, K.R. Hydrogeology, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1989. 
 
Karanth,K.R. Groundwater assessment, development and management, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1987.

Mutreja,K.N. Applied hydrology, Tata McGraw Hill,New Delhi, 1986. 

Cherry J.A. and Freeze R.A. Groundwater. Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1986.

Todd D.K. Groundwater hydrology, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1980.

Chow,V.T. Handbook of applied hydrogeology, McGraw Hill Book Co., 1964.

FEtter,C.W. Applied hydrogeology, CBS Publishers & Distributers, New Delhi, 1990.
;;
GS 656;Heat transfer - conduction, convention, radiation, heat flow measurements, structural influence on the heat flow distribution, effect of radioactivity, role of groundwater circulation and changes of state of groundwater.

Natural hydrothermal systems: chemicalnature of hydrothermal systems, hydrothermal solutions, chemical and isotopic geothermometers, origin and age of geothermal resources, rock alteration related to water geochemistry, data collection and processing.

Utilization  of geothermal energy. Economics and managament of geothermal energy. Case histories - Indian and world examples.;;Economides,M. and Ungemach,P. Applied grothermics, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1987.

Eillis,A.J. and Mahon Waj Chemistry and geothermal systems, Academy Press, London,1977.

D amore, F. Applications of geochemistry in grothermal reservoir development, UNDP Publication. 1991.

Proceedings - 2 UN Symposium on the Development and use of Geothermal Resources, U.S. Govt. Printing Press, Washington D.C. 

Drever,J.I. Geochemistry of natural water, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1982.


;;
GS 657;Universal stage methods for optic orientation, felspar composition determination and determination of twin laws of felspars. Use of universal stage in the determination of prefered orientation of grains.

X-ray diffraction, procedure and methods for mineral identification, electron microscopy. fluorescence studies, catbodoluminescence and thermoluminescence studies.

DTA and TGA. Fluid inclusion studies in minerals.

;;Naidu,P.R.J. Universal Stage - 4 axes, University of Madras, 1958.

Bloss,F.D. Crystallography & crystal chemistry. Holt, Rinehart and Winston Inc., New York, 1971.

Shepherd,T.J. Rankin,A.H. and Alderton,D.H.M. A practical grude t fluid inclusion Studies, Backis & Sons, Glascow, 1985.

Marshall, D.J. Cathodoluminescence of geological materials, Unwin Hyman, Boston, 1988.
;;
MG 661;Introduction - Scope of Management Accounting. Financial, Cost and Management Accounting: an Overview. Standard Accounting Principles. Financial Accounting: the Accounting Mechanics, Basic Entries, Balance Sheet, and Preparation of Financial Statements. Preparing Final Accounts for a Company. Analysis and Interpretation of Financial Statements. Fund Flow Analysis. Methods of Inventory Valuation.
;;C.T. Horngren, Accounting for Management Control: An Introduction, Prentice Hall, New Delhi, 1976. 
M.A. Pocock and A. H. Taylor, Handbook of Financial Planning and Control, Gower, Westmead, 1981. 
J. H. Rossell, W.W. Frasure and D.H. Taylor, Managerial Accounting, 3rd ed., Merrill, Columbus, 1980.
;;
GS 658;Characteristics of rock mass androck materials. Measurement and monitoring of rock behaviour. Soil properties and their behaviour. Classifications of rock materials and rock masses. Rock excavation technology:  blasting drilling, breaking and cutting. Rock reinforcement: grouting, rock bolt, pillar support, lining and ground freezing. Movement and controlof groundwater. Underground storage of oil, gas, water and disposal of waste materials.  Ground movement, craving, subsidence and earthquakes. Applied engg. geology for foundations, reservoirs, tunnels, underground constructions, quarrying and mining. Stability of rock slopes, quarrying and mining. Stability of rock slopes.
;;Franklin,J.A. and Dusseault,M.B. Rock engineering applications, McGraw Hill Publishing Co., 1989.

Franklin,J.A. and Dursseault,M.B. Rock engineering applications, McGraw Hill Publ. Co., 1991.

Bell, F.G. Fundamentals of engineering geology. Aditya Books (P) Ltd., New Delhi, 1983.

Bell,F.G. Applied engineering geology, Butterworth & Co., 1984.

Roberts,A. Applied gro-technology, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1981.

Bienawski,Z.T. Engineering Rock mass classifications, Rock mass classifications, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1989.


 ;;
GS 659;Methods of chemical analysis of rocks, rock forming minerals and ores, Shapiro Brannock method, standards, spectrophotometry, flame photometry, atomic absorption spectrometry, X-analysis of water samples.;;Willard,H.H.  Meritt,L.L.  Dean,J.A.  and Settle,F.A.  Instrumental methods of analyses, CBS Publ. Distributors, New Delhi, 1986.

Shapiro,L. and Brannock,W.W. Rapid analysis of silicate, carbonate and phosphatic Rocks, USGS Bull, 1144 - A, 1982.;;
GS 660;Drilling fluids, Coring, Core-, Mud- and Gas-logging. Core analysis. Principles of formation testing. Well acidisation. Borehole cementing.

Electrical properties of rocks and minerals, geoelectrical methods of prospecting, Techniques and methods of prospecting, Techniques and methods of well logging, well drilling, formation evaluation. Principles, methods amd application of the following logs:

Electrical logging: Normal log, lateral log, laterolog, induction logging, spontanious polarization logging, microlog and electric log combination.  Radioactive logging: Natural gamma logging, gamma ray density logging and neutron logging. Sonic log, gravity log and susceptibility log, thermal measurements, saturation estimation, lithology and porosity determination, well log interpretation with field examples.



;;Schlumberger Manual Log interpretation principles/ applications, Schlumberger Education Services,1989.
Sierra, Fundamentals of well log interpretation, Vol.1 and 2.  Elsevier, 1984.
Asquith, G. and Gibson, C. Basic well log analysis for geologists, Academic Press, 1982.
Robinson, E.S. and Coruh, C.Basic exploration geophysics, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 1988.
Sahay, B. Rai, A and Ghosh, M well-site geological techniques for petroleum exploration: Methods and systems for formation evaluation, Oxford & IBH, New Delhi, 1988.
;;
GS 661;Fundamentals of remote sensing, digital image data formats, image rectification and restoration techniques - geometric correction, rediometric correction and noise suppression, image histograms, density slicing, image enhancement techniques - contrast manipulation, spatial filtering, edge enhancement and fourier analysis, multi-image manipulations - spectral ratioing, vegetation indices, principal components analysis, IHS colour space transformation and data fusion, multi-spectral image classification involving supervised and unsupervised algorithms, remote sensing applications in geology.

Fundamentals of GIS, spatial data models, spatial data structure, map conversion, GID data preparation, visualisation and query of spatial data, spatial data transformations, DEM and its applications and map algebra, GIS and remote snesing, spatial modelling, case studies of geological applications, principles of Global Positioning Systems (GPS).;;Jensen, J.R. Introductory digital image processing: A remote perspective, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1986.
Jain, A.K. Fundamentals of digital image processing, Prentice Hall India, 1989.
Lillesand, T.M> and Kiefer, R.W. Remote sensing and image interpretation. John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1987.
Bonham-Carter, G.F. Geographic Information System for geoscientists: Modelling with GIS, Pergamon, 1994.
Maguire, D>J. Goodchild, M.F. and Rhind, D.W GIS- Principles and applications, Longman Scientific and TEchnical, 1991.
Burrough, P.A. Principles of geographical information systems for land resources assessment, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1986.;;
GS 663;Seismic Exploration: Theory and geometry of seismic waves, seismic velocity, characteristics of seismic events, seismic sources and equipment. Reflection and refraction field method. Data processing - fourier analysis, convolution, correlation, filtering, velocity analysis, stacking and migration, seismic stratigraphy - seismic sequences, facies and reflection character analysis, hydrocarbon indicators, seismic interpretation.

Gravity and Magnetic methods: Principles and methods of gravity and magnetic prospecting,instrumentation, data processing, interpretation with case studies.
 
;;Sheritt,R.E. and Geldart,L.P. Exploration seismology, Cambridge Univ. Press 1995.

Telford,W.M., Geldart,L.P. and Sheriff,R.E.  Applied geophysics, Cambridge Univ. Press 1990.

Dobrin,M.B.  and Savit,C.H. Introduction to geophysical prospecting, McGraqhill, 1988.

Robinson,E.S. and Coruh,C. Basic exploration geophysics, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1988.;;
GS 665;Analysis of ductile shear zones: identification, determination of sense of shear, strain pattern, relation with mineralisation. Analysis of faults: identification, direction of movement , relation woth mineralisation ,criteria for active faulting seismicity and P-wave first motion analysis.

Application of remote sensing for identification. Analysis ofjoints: Joint pattern, determination of stress direction, rose diagrams.

Interpretationof large scale structure from the minor structures in folded terrains.  Folds in relation to mineralisation. Analysis of tectonic fabric: Fiberous veins, strain fringes, boundins,porphyroblast growth in relation to folds. Direct measurement of strain: Oolites, pebbles, fossils. Natural microgauges.

Special techniques: Preparation of oriented thin sections, use of linear ring, torsion ring, triaxial ring, use of U stage.

;;Ramsay,J.G. and Huber,M.L. The techniques of modern structural geology, Part I. Strain Analysis Academic Press, London, 1983.

Ramsay,J.G. Folding and fracturing of rocks, McGraw Hill, 1967.

Ghosh,S.K. Structural geology - fundamentals and modern developments, Pergamon Press, 1993.

Passcheir,C.W. and Trouw, R.A.J.
Microelectronics, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1996.

De Paor, Structural geology and personal computer, Pergamon Press., 1996.

;;
AE 706;Basic equations of fluid dynamics and levels of approximation. Mathematical nature of the flow equations & their boundry conditions. Grids and transformations. Basic discretization techniques applied to model equations and systems of equations:finite difference, finite volume and finite element methods. Analysis of numerical schemes: concept of consistency, stability and convergence.  Error and stability analysis. Some applications.;;Hirsch,C. Numerical Computation of Internal and External Flows, Vol.I, John Wiley, 1990.

Anderson, J.D. Computational Fluid Dynamics, McGraw Hill, 1995.

Anderson, D.A. Tannehill, J.C. and Pletcher, R.H. Computational Fluid Dymnamics and Heat Transfer, McGraw Hill, 1984.

 ;;
AE 705;Nomenclature of air craft aomponents. Standard atmosphere. Basic aerodynamics: Streamlines, steady fluid motion, incompressible flow, Bernoulli"s  equation, Mach number, Pressure and airspeed measurement, Boundry layer, Reynolds number, Laminar and Turbo-lent flow. Airfoils and Wings: Pressure coefficient and lift calculation, Critical Match number, Wave drag, Finite wings, Included drag, Swept wings, Aircraft Performance: Steady level flight, Altitude effects, Absolute ceiling, Steady climbibg flight, Energy methods, Range and Endurance, Sustained lecel turn, Pull-up, V-n diagram, Take off and landing. Longitudinal static stability and control, Neutral point.
;;Anderson,J.D., introduction to Flight, McGraw Hill, 1989.

Hale,H.F., Introduction to Aircraft Performance, Selection and Design, John Wiley, 1984.

Barnard,R.H., and Phillpott,D.R., Aircraft Flight, Longman, 1989.

;;
AE 724; Physical laws of fluid Mechanics, Similarity analysis, inviscid incompressible flows, inviscid compressible flows, Viscous flows, Various measurable quantities. Flow facilities: Various types of Wind Tunnels, Water Tunnels, Towing Tank. Measurement of mean and fluctuating pressures: Various types of probes, Manometers, Transducers. Measurement of Temperature: Termocouples, Measurement of Velocity: Mean velocity, Turbo-lence, Hot Wire Anemometer, LDV, PIV. Measurement of Skin Friction: Balance, Preston Tube; Unsteady Flow Measurements: Conditional sampling technique for periodic flows. Calibration: Primary calibrators and traceability. Data analysis: Precision, accuracy, error.
;Nil;R.J. Goldstom (ed.), Fluid Mechanics Measurements, Hemisphere Publishing, 1983.
;;
AE 713;Introduction to spacecraft, rockets & missiles, their basic functions and features, some examples. Fundamentals of Rocket Performance, simplified equations of variable mass rocket motion. Evaluation of rocket/missile trajectories as projectile motion, rectilinear motion in vaccum and in atmosphere , velocity-mass relations & other other performance calculations and the gravity turn trajectory. Jet damping effect and concept of multistaging in launch vehicles & missilles. Fundamentals of constrained optimization in multistage rockets. Central force motion, Two body & three body problem, Kepler s law of planetary motion, Geometry of conic sections and orbit determination from initial conditions Spacecraft orbit transfer, attitude motion, stability and control of the attitude motion.
;;M.H. Kaplan, Modern Spacecraft Dynamics & Control, John Wiley, 1976.

J.W. Cornnelisse, Rocket Propulsion and Space flight Dynamics, Pitman, 1979.

W.T. Thompson, Introduction to Space Dynamics, John Wiley, 1963.;;
AE 709; Thin-walled stiffened structures in aerospace vehicles, basic components and assemblages. General formulation for thin-walled beams of arbitrary closed and open cross-sections, sections, shear flow and shear centre calculations for general cross-sections, warpless cross-sections, Blending and torsion of multi-cell thin-walled beams - warping, shear flow and shear centre, stresses in thin walled beams of variable depth, effect of taper. Effect of warp restraint in thin-walled beams-warping, chear flow and shear centre centre, stresses in thin walled beams of varianble depth, effect , effect of taper. Effect of warp restraint in thin- walled beams, axial constraint stresses, effect of warp restraint in open section beams. Buckling of composite shapes, buckling of stiffened sheets, effective width concept, design charts and formulae. Diagonal tension and semi-tension field beams.;;T.H.G. Megson, "Aircraft Structures for Engineering Students for Engineering Students", 2nd ed. Edward Arnold, London, 1990.

E.F. Bruhn, "Analysis and Design of Flight Vehicle Structures", Tri-State Offset Co., Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A., 1965.

D.Williams, "Introduction to the Theory of Aircraft Structures", Edward Arnold, London, 1960.

B.E. Gatewood, "Virtual Principles in Aircraft Structures", Vol. 1 & 2, Kulwer Academic Publishers, The Netherlands, 1989.
;;
AE 715;Elements of analytical dynamics , generalised coordinates, Principle of Virtual Work, Hamilton s principle, Lagrange s equations, applications.

Discrete systems with multiple degrees of freedom, elastic & inertia coupling, natural frequencies and mode, free vibration response, orthogonality of natural modes, modal analysis, forced vibration response, special and general cases of damping matrix formulations, solutions, solution of the eigenvalue problem. 

Vibration of continuous systems, diffenential equations and boundary conditions, longitudinal, flexural and torsional vibrations of one-dimenwional structures approximate, methods - Ritz series, assumed modes, Galerkin and integral formulations, vibration analysis of simplified aircraft and launch vehicle structures, structural damping, free and forced response of continuous sysems, modal truncation. Special formulations for large systems. ;;L. Meirovitch, "Elements of Vibration Analysis", 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill Book Co. 1988.

W.Weaver, S.P. Timoshenko and D.H. YOUNG, Vibration Problems in Engineering , 5th Ed., John- Wiley & sons , 1990.

L.Melrovitch, Computational Methods in Structural Dynamics, Sitjho & Noordhoff, 1980

R.W. Cough and Joseph Penzien, Dynamics of Structure, McGraw Hill, 1975.

R.L. Bisplinghoff, H. Ashley and R.L. Halfman, Aeroelasticity, Addition-Wesley, 1965. ;;
AE 725;  Historical development and nature of Civil Aviation. Aviation  organisations and their functions. Aviation organisations and their functions. Air - Transport regulations.

The Airline industry. Airline economics and planning; Operating costs and revenue; Fleet planning and route development; Aircraft operations and performance. Aircraft Systems.

Introduction to ATC and avionics, Aircraft characteristics related to Airport Design, Airport Layout and Configuration, Geometric design of the airfield, Airport Costing and Financing, Cost-benefit analysis of Airport development.

Impact of Airline deregulation on the airline industry. Air-transport in developing countries, Modern trends and current issues in Air transportation.;Nil;Naval Taneja, Introduction to Civil Aciation, 2nd ed. Lexington Books, 1988.

William E.O Conner, An Introduction to Airline Economics, Praeger Publishers, New York, 1995.

R. Wilkinson , Aircraft Structures and Systems Addison Wesley Longman , 1996.

Robert Horonjeff, and Fransis, X. McKelvy Planning and Design of Airports, 4th ed. McGraw Hill, 1994. 

Norman Ashford, Clifton Moore, Airport Finance, Van Nostrand Reinhold , 1992.

George Williams, The Airline Industry and the impact of Deregulation, 2nd edition, Avebury Aviation, 1994.

;;
AE 712; Dynamics : Equations of motion of a rigid aircraft in body-fixed axes. Stability and wind axes. Linearization of equations of motion about steady level flight, stability derivatives, various longitudinal and lateral-directional modes of motion. 
Control: Stability augmentation systems, command augmentation systems and various autopilots for longitudinal and lateral-directional motion, ILS-and VOR-coupled control systems. 
Special Topics: Effect of inertial and kinematic cross coupling. Flying and handling qualities, pilot ratings, pilot-in-the-loop analysis. Modelling of flexibility. Control-structure interaction. Aircraft response to gust and turbulence. Active control technology applications in a control configured vehicle. Sensors used in flight control. Elements of missile control systems. ;Nil; R.C. Nelson, Flight Stability and Automatic Control, McGraw Hill, 1990.
D. McLean, Automatic Flight Control Systems, Prentice Hall, 1990
B.L. Stevens and F.L. Lewis, Aircraft Control and Simulation, John Wiley and Sons, 1992.
J.H. Blakelok, Automatic Control of Aircraft and Missiles,Wiley- Interscience, 1991.



;;
AE 708;Introduction, Various propulsive devices used for aerospace applications. Classifications of rockets: Electral, Nuclear and Chemical rockets, Applications of rockets. Nozzle design: Flow through nozzle, Real nozzle, Equilibrium and frozen flow, Adaptive and non-adaptive nozzles. Thrust vector controls, Rocket performance parameters.  Solid propellant rockets, Grain compositions. Design of grain. Liquid propellant rockets, Injector design, cooling systems, Feed Systems: Pressure feed and turbo-pump feed system. Heat transfer problems in rocket engines.;;G.C. Oates, Aerothermodynamics of Gas Turbine and Rocket Propulsion, AIAA, 1988.

S.M. Barrere et at, Rocket Propulsion, Elseveir, London, 1956.

S.P. Sutton, Rocket Propulsion Elements, John Wiley, 1954.

;;
AE 719;Formulations of Euler equations, Discretization methods for Euler equations. High resolution schemes and TVD. Properties of Navier-Stokes equations. Discretization of NS equations. Boundry conditions. Convergence acceleration techniques.

;;Hirsch. C, Numerical Computation of Internal and External Flows, John Wiley, 1990.

Leveque,R.J., Numerical Methods for Conservation Laws, Birkhauser Verlag, 1990.

Anderson,D.A., Tannehill,J.C. and Pletcher,R.H., Computational Fluid Dynamics and Heat Transfer, McGraw Hill, 1984.

;;
AE 721; Review of vectors calculus, Review of field equations in engineering, Sets and functions, Linear vector spaces, Linear transformations and functionals. Normal spaces, iner product spaces, variational formulations of boundary value problems, Weak solutions, Minimization of functional. Lagrange multiplier method, Variational methods of approximations e.g.  Ritz methods . Applications to engineering problems.;Nil;Reddy,J.N., Applied functional analysis and variational methods in engineering, McGrag Hill, 1986.

Naylor,A.W. and Shell,G.R., Linear operators theory in Engineering and Science, Rinehart and Winston, 1971.

Luenberger, D. G., Optimization by Vector Space Methods, John Wiley, 1969.;;
AE 657; Review of Fluid Mechanics; Rotating corodinate system, Ekman and Rossby numbers, Coriolis phenomena, vorticity and circulation, vortex dynamics, Rotation and Inertial Waves; Application in Aerospace, Earth and Atmosphere sciences.;Nil;Vanyo,J.P., Rotating fluids in Engineering and Sciences, Butterworth-Heinmann, 1993.

White,F.M., Fluid Mechanics, McGraw-Hill, 1986.

Berlin, J.J., and Smith M.L., Aerodynamics for Engineers, Prentice-Hall, 1989.

Pedlosky,J., Geophysical Fluid Mechanics, Springer verlag, 1987.

;;
AE 717; Static stanbility:  Longitudinal neural point in stick fixed and stick free comditions, directional stability, Longitudinal and directional control. Lateral stability and control. Equations of motion of rigid aircraft in body fixed axes. Stability axes, stability derivatives. Steady flight and perturbed flight. Various logitudinal and lateral-directional modes. Linearisation of the equations of motion. Decoupling of lateral-directional motion from longitudional motion.;;J. Roskam, Flight Dynamics of Rigid and Elastic Airplanes, University of Kansas Press, 1972.

R.C. Nelson, Flight Stability and Automatic Control, McGraw Hill, 1990.

B.Etkin, Dynamics of Atmospheric Flight, John Wiley, 1972.
;;
AE 722; Structured Grid, methods of generating structured grids, Multiblock Strategies and Interface Treatment and their merits and Interface Treatment and their merits and demerits, Unstructured Grids, Merits/ Demerit over structured grids, Methods of Unstructured Grid Generation Use of Background Meshes, Adaptive Grids, Grid quality and Dynamic griding, Auto Blocking Techniques CADGD Techniques in Grid Generation, Grid Generation Software, Applications of Unstructured and Hybrid Grids and Multi Block Structured Grids.
;Nil;P.L. George, Automatic mesh generation applications to finite element methods, John Wiley, 1991.;;
AE 723;Matching concepts for Turbine Engine Components : Engine types - TJE & TFE configurations, Inlets-compressors - Main Burner - Turbines - Optional After Burner - Nozzle. Control Problem Definition and Basic Control programmes - Analysis and Performance. Definition of optimal control of aircraft turbine engines - Methods of Optimal control system synthesis and Design Current Practice in Digital Electronic Engine Control - FADEC. ;Nil;Sane S.K.,Control of Aircraft Turbine Engines, Lecture Notes, 1996.
;;
AE 714;Types of Aerial vehicles, their basic principles, advantages, disadvantages, limitations.  Product System design process. Formulation of problem-objective function, constraints. Solutions. Aircraft project phases. 
Configuration: Types and comparison of wing, tail, fuselage, landing Gear.  Wing-tail combinations, Powerplant (types, numbers, locations). Estimation of C, Field length, Allowable CG range, Thrust vs. speed and Altitude for Propeller and Jet. Estimation of preliminary weight, Acquisition cost. Operating cost. Rubber Engine Sizing : Fixed engine sizing: Detailed weights, detailed geometry, etc. Detailed design: v-n diagram, design loads, structural layout. Introduction to advanced concepts in aircraft design. ;Nil;D.P. Raymer,Aircraft Design - A conceptual approach, AIAA Educational Series, 1990. 
E. Torenbeek, Synthesis of Subsonic Airplane Design, Delft University Press, 1977.  ;;
AE 707; Potential flow, Circulation and lift generation, Kutta conditon. Thin airfoil theory, Source, Vortex and doublet panel methods. Subsonic compressible flow over airfoils, Prandtl-Glauert Compressibility correction. Supersonic flow over air-foil, Prandtl-Glauert Compressibility correction. Supersonic flow over air-foils, Ackeret Theory.  Oblique shocks and expansion waves, sock expansion method. Potential flow over finite wings, lifting-line theory theory, Vortex lattice method. Supersonic flow over finite wings, subsonic/supersonic leading edge. Linearized theory, Supersonic vortex lattice method. Slender Body Theory: Introduction to Transonic flows, Conical flows, Hypoersonic flow and high-temperature flows.;;J.D. Anderson, Fundamentals of Aerodynamics, McGraw Hill, 1991.

J.J. Bertin & M.C. Smith, Aerodynamics for Engineers, Prentice Hall, 1989. 

A.M. Kuethe & C. Chow, Foundations of Aerodynamics, John Wiley, 1986.

H. Ashley & M.T. Landahl, Aerodynamics of Wings and Bodies, Addison Wesley, 1965. 
;;
AE 703;Introduction, z-transform, discrete transfer function, relations between continuois and discrete systems, state space modelling, controllability and observability, the digital filters, design using root locus, pole placement, regulator design, estimators, introduction to optimal control.
;;G.F. Franklin, J.D.Powell, M.L.Workman, Digital Control of Dynamic Systems, Addition-Wesley Publishing Co., 1990.

K.J.Astrom, B.Wittenmark, Computer Controlled Systems: Theory and Sesigh, Prentice-Hall, 1984.
;;
AE 751; Introduction to modelling of systems; Objectives & types of models; Analytical & Experimental methods for system modeling; Deterministic vs. stochastic models; Linear vs. nonlinear Models. Graphical & Mathematical representation of models; Block & signal flow diagrams; Power flow diagrams for models; Computer simulation diagrams. Computers & their use in system simulation. Simulation languages. Introduction to flight simulation. Simulation of elementary flight maneuvers & tragectories. A PC-based flight simulator.;;Deoblin,E.O., System Modelling and Response, John Wiley & Sons, 1980.

Ogata,K., Modern Control Engineering, Prentice Hall India, 1995.

Narasingh Deo, System Simulation with Digital Computer, Prentice Hal India, 1997.

Law,A.M., and Kelton,W.D., Simulation Modelling & Analysis, McGraw-Hill, 1991.

Rolfe,J.M., and Staples,K.J., Flight Stimulation, Cambridge Aerospace Series, Cambridge University Press, 1986.

AGARD-CP-198, Flight Simulation/ Guidance/System Simulation, 1976.

Case Studies provided by Aerospace organisations , Aerospace Systems Engineering Information Laboratory, CASDE.
;;
AE 726;Introduction, Modes of Heat Transfer and Basic equations.  Conduction: Simple
steady and unsteady conduction, applications.  Convection: Natural and forced convection, applications.  Radiation : Stefan - Boltzmann Law, Planck"s law, Absorptivity, Enimissivity shape factor, applications, Aerospace applications : turbine blade cooling, Disk cooling, Combustion Chamber Cooling, Rocket engine cooling systems - regeneratively 
cooled, dump cooling, aflation cooling, Radiation sheld.;;J.P. Holman, Heat Transfer, McGraw Hill, 7th Edition, 1992.
S.P. Sukhatme, A textbook on Heat Transfer, Orient Longman, 1979.;;
AE 728; Special features of aircraft production, Aircraft assembly techniques.  Design and manufacture of tooling.  Assembly jigs and fixtures. 
Master tooling. Assembly of riveted, welded and adhesive bonded sub-assemblies. Detachable - joints, Installation processes. Assembly of aircraft sections and units.  Equipping and final assembly.  Inspection and testing.  Coordination of master, manufacturing and assembly tooling.  Plastics for tooling, Fabrication and assembly of polymer composite structures.  Machining, joining and repari of composites.  Process modelling and optimization.  Quality and reliability of an aircraft.  Estimating and planning of production.  CAD/CAM.;;S.C. Keshu and K.K. Ganapathi, Aircraft Production, Interline Publishing, 1993. 
F.L. Mathews(ed), Joining Fiber Reinforced Plastics, Elsevier, 1987.
M.M. Schwartz(ed), Composite Materials Handbook, McGraw-Hill, 1992.;;
AE 730; Basics of vibration measurements - Terminology and parameters, types of vibration and its quantification, basic 
considerations in experimentation, Vibration measurement equipment and signal analysers - types of transducers, signal conditioning, measuring techniques and instruments, frequency analysis - DFT & FFT, digital signal processing considerations.

Experimental modal analysis - mathematical models, FRF and its forms, modal analysis theory, experimental methods, excitation techniques, single and multiple exciter techniques, shaker systems, modal parameters extraction techniques, SDOF and MDOF methods in frequency and time domain.  Automatic force appropriation techniques.  Ground resonance testing of Aircraft. Introduction to aircraft servo-elastic testing.;Nil;Harris C.M., "Shock and Vibration Handbook", 3rd edition, McGraw-Hill Book
Company, N.Y., 1988.
Ewins D.J.,"Modal Testing : Theory and Practice", John Wiley & Sons, N.Y.,1984.;;
EE 651;Review of principles of power system protection: over-current, directional, differential and distance protection. 
Teactance, impedences and mho relays, numerical relays:motivation, basic hardware.  Review of digital signal processing techniques: sampling, aliasing, courier, discrete Fourier transforms and fast fourier transforms.
Numerical algorithms, CT/PT modelling and standard, simulation of transients, electromagnetic transient program(EMTP);;J.L. Blackburn, Protective Relaying : Principles and Applications, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1987.
A.G. Phadke and J.S.THorp, Computer Relaying for power Systems, John Wiley & Sons, New York,1988.;;
EE 653;Review of line commutated converters, inverters, voltage control & Power factor improvement.  Power Devices : BJT, MOSFET, IGBT & GTOs - operating characteristics and gate drive requirements and circuits.  Switched-mode rectifier : various power circuit configurations  and wave shaping techniques. Synchronous link rectifiers:
Power circuit configurations, control techniques, application of these converters in load compensation, series compensators, multi level converters.  Inverters : Voltage source inverters :-single phase & Six step inverters, voltage control & PWM strategies and implementation aspects, Modification of power circuit for four quadrant operation.  Current source inverters : single phase and three phase power circuit configuration and analysis.  Load commutated inverters: principle of operation, modification of power circuit configuration for low frequency operation.  Phase Controllers.
;;N. Mohan, T.M. Undeland & W.P. Robbins, Power Electronics : Converter, Applications & Design, John Wiley & Sons, 1989.
M.H. Rashid, Power Electronics & A.C. Drives, Prentice Hall, 1986.;;
EE 655;Loadflow for AC systems, fast decoupled load flow, optional power flow.
Z-matrix for short circuit studies.
State estimation, LO algorithm, fast decoupled state estimation.
Security and contingency studies.  
Unit Commitment, Load frequency control.
Optimal hydro-thermal scheduling.
AI applications.;;O.I. Elgerd, Electric Energy Systems Theory, McGraw Hill, 1971.
G.W. Stagg and A.H. El-Abiad, Computer Methods in power System Analysis, McGraw Hill, 1968.
G.L.Kusic, Computer Aided Power Systems Analysis, Prentice Hall, 1986.
I.J. Magrath and D.P.Kothari, Modern Power Systems Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill, 1980.
A.J. Wood and B.F. WollenBerg, Power Generation, Operation and control, John Wiley, 1984.
;;
EE 657;Methods of DC motor control, non-regenerative controled rectifiers, fully controlled converters, field control, switching systems for DC motors, chopper regulators, aspects of analysis performance and stability of variable speed dc drives.

Induction motor control systems, ac regulators and static switches, control of effective rotor resistance, recovery of slip energy, Variable frequency control of ac motors, current source inverter fed induction motor drive.  forced commutated inverter fed drives, self-controlled synchronous motor drives and traction drives. Analysis, performance and stability of synchronous and asynchronous drives.  Solar and battery powered drives.
;;W.Leonhard, Control of electric drives, Springer Verlag, 1985.
P.Vas, Vector control of ac machines, Clarendon press, Oxford, 1990.
S.K. Pillai, Analysis of Thyristor Power Conditioned Motors, University Press, 1992.
G.K.Dubey, Fundamentals of Electrical Drives, Narosa Publications, 1995.;;
AE 732; Thermochemical behaciour of polymer composites. MIcromechanical modelling of continuous fiber composites. Interlaminar response of laminated composites. Fracture and fracture mechanics of composites Notched composites. Damage tolerance. Design for improved fracture resistance, impact resistance improved fracture resistance, impact resistance and fatigue resistance of polymer composites. Processing science and fabrication technology of polymer composites. Processing science and fabrication technologh of polymer composites. Process modeling and optimization. Machining joining and repair of composites. Abiation. Environmental degradation of composites. Damping. 2D and 3D textile structural composites. Hybrid composites. Composites in aerospace applications Carbon-carbon composites. Composites as intelligent materials and structures.
 ;AE 673;B.Z.Jang, Advanced Polymer Composites, ASM International, 1994.

G. Eckold, Design and Manufacture of Composite Structures. Woodhead, 1994.

Engineered Materials Handwook - Vol.1, Composites, ASM  International, 1989.

;;
EE 659;Motivation.  Mathematical review, matrix factorizatins, sets and sequences, convex sets and functions.  Linear programming and simplex method, Weierstrases"Theorm, Karush Kuhn Tucker optimality conditions, algorithms, convergence, unconstrained optimization, line search methods, method of multidimensional search, steepest descent methods, Newton"s method, modifications to Newton"s method, trust region methods, conjugate gradient methods, quasi-Newton"s methods. Constrained optimization, penalty and barrier function methods, augmented Legrangian methods, polynomial time algorithm for linear programming, successive linear programming, successive quadratic programming.;;R. Fletcher, Practical Optimization(2nd Edition) John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1987.
M.S. Bazaraa, H.D. Sherali and C. Shetty, Nonlinear Programming, theory and algorithms, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1993.;;
EE 673;This is a laboratory based on computer simulation and hardware experiments consisting of computer simulation experiments on power systems and power electronics and hardware experiments on power electronics.;;;;
AE 736;Basic equations of motion of unsteady potential flow, small perturbation linearised theory. Boundary conditions and addition-al physical considerations. Solution methodology, Accelerated flows. Unsteady lift and moments on oscillation two- simentional thin airfoil and  slender wing in imcompressible flow and super-sonic flow, Pidton Theory. Introduction to unsteady lifting surface theory. Divergence of swept, tapered wings. Aeroelastic loads and Aeroelastic efficiency computations. Flutter of wings. Modal formulation and assumed modes approaches. Generalised aerodynamic forces and modal unsteady airloads. Flutter Solution methods. Transient motion of airfoils - Fourier superposition, Wargner and Kussner functions and gust response. Time domain modelling of modal unsteady aerodynamic forces. Subcritical response of wings. Exposure to practical aeroelastic analysis. Introduction to aeroservoelastic modelling of aircraft. ;;R.L.Bisplinghoff, H. Ashley and R.L.Halfman, Aeroelasticity , Addition- wesley, Massachusetts, 1995.

Y.C.Fung, An Introduction to the Theory of Aeroelasticity, John Wiley & Sons,N.Y.  1962. 

E.H.Dowell, H.C.Curtiss, R.H.Scanlan and F. Sisto, A Modern Course in Aeroelasticity, Sijthroff & Noordoff, Netherlands, 1978.
;;
EE 675; 16-bit microprocessors(8086 etc) and 8/16 bit microcontrollers (MH69HC11, 89HC196), their programming and interfacing aspects, realizing PWM techniques using fP/fC, implementing closed loop control techniques using these controllers/processors. Digital signal processors, and their applications in PE.;;D.V. Hall, Microprocessors and Interfacing, Tata McGraw Hill, 1991.
L. Leventhal, 68000 Assembly Language Programming, McGraw Hill, 1987.
G.H. Miller, Microcomputer Engineering, Prentice Hall, 1993.
George Batten, Jr. Programmable Controllers, McGraw Hill, Inc. 1994.
;;
AE 704;  Role of computers in interactive structural analysis and design. Relecance, role and concepts of numerical intergation techniques and efficiency of reduced integration . Numerical methods of solution of characteristic equations with graphic aids. Efficient data storage techniques vis-a-vis solution methods for static equilibrium equations of discrete continua. Iterative schemes and their relative merits. Design of numerical codes for structural mechanics. Solution methods for linear and quadratic eigen value problems. Numerical methods for transient analysis of structural models. Numerical techniques in computational fracture mechanics. Introduction to automatic structural analysis systems.;;K.J.Bathe and E.L.Wilson, Numerical Methods in Finite Element Analysis, Prentice Hall of India, 1987.

O.C.Zienkievicz, The Finite Element Method, 3rd ed., Tata McGraw-Hill, 1987.

V.Rama Murthy, Computer Aided Design in Mechanical Engg., Tata McGraw Hill, 1987. 

Maario Paz , Structural Dynamics Theory and Computations 2nd ed., C.B.S.Publishers, 1987.
;;
ID 647;Properties and usage of thermoplastics, thermosetting plastics.  Selection and use of plastics for engineering and consumer products.
Design limitations and specific advantages of molding processes.
Properties and use of rubber, ceramics and glass. Ferrous and non Ferrous metals-various processes and assembly techniques.  Concepts of structure and costing.
Significance of form in structural strength of products.  Influence of materials and processes on product aesthetics.  Industrial finishes for plastic, wood and metals.
Properties of natural materials like wood, bambo, cane, leather,cloth, jute
and paper and their use at craft and industrial levels.;;Beadle J.D., Plastic Forming, Production
Engineering series, Macmillan, London,1971
Beadle J.D., Metal Forming, Production Engineering series,Macmillan, London,1971
Beadle John D., Product treatment and finishes,Macmillan, London,1971.;;
CE 615; Formulation of different types of structural optimisation problems; Optimality criteria based structural optimisation; Computational of derivatives of response quantities with respect to design variables; Classical optimisation; Lagrange multiplier technique and Kuhn-Tucker conditions; Solution of NLP by direct methods and by series of unconstrained optimisation problems and by series of linear programming problems.;;S.S.Rao, Optimisation, Theory and Applications, 2nd  Edition, Wiley Eastern Ltd., New Delhi, 1991.

J.S.Arora, Introduction to Optimum Design, McGraw-Hill International Edition, New York, 1989.

A.J.Morris (Editor), Foundations of Structural Optimisation - A Unified Approach; John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, 1982.

G.V.Reklaitis, A.Ravindran and K.M.Ragsdell,  Engineering Optimisation Methods and Applications, John Wiley, New York, 1983.

;;
AE620;Principles of discretisation; Element stiffness  mass formulation based of direct, variational and weighted residual techniques; Displacements, hybrid stress and mixed approaches; Shape functions and numerical integrations, convergence, Displacement, hybrid stress and mixed formulations; Shape functions, isoparametric formulation, numerical integration and convergence; Formulations for rectangular, triangular and isoparametric elements for two dimensional and axisymmetric elements for two dimensional and axisymmetricstress analysis; Thin and Thick plates and shells, Semi-analytical formulations; Three dimensional elements and degenerated forms; Stiffener elements and modifications such as use of different coordinates systems, such as use of different coordinate systems , use of nonconforming modes and penalty functions; Application to layared composite plate/shells, bridge, roof, nuclear and offshore structures; Hybrid stress and mixed formulations for plates.;;O.C.Zienkiewicz, The Finite Elements Method Method, 4th Edition, Volumes 1 and 2, Tata McGraw-Hill, New Delhi, 1977.

K.J.Bathe, Finite Element Procedures, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi, 1997.

R.D.Cook, D.S.Malkus and M.E.Plesha, Concepts and Applications of Finite Element Analysis, 3rd Edition John Wiley and Sons, NewJersry, 1989.;;
ID 661;Introduction to applicatiojn of computer graphics for visualizing concepts. Introduction to hardware including operating systems, file management and hardware limitations. Introduction to the basic concepts of software. Exploration of various packages for painting, sketching, drawing, drafting, modelling and page composition.
Introduction to the basics of 3D modelling on computers.;;Marshall G. R., Computer Graphics in Applications, Prentics Hall, 1987.
Kerlow I.V. and Rosebush J., Computer Graphics for Designers and Artists, VNR, N. Jersey, 1986.;;
ID 669;Study of how designers think and solve design problems, using protocol analysis.  Analysing and mapping of the design process.  Understanding the structure of the design process and its non llinear nature.  
Telescoping of the analytical and the creative phases.  Study of the influence of the design tools, Issues involved in handling new tools.  Identifying the role of imergency and visualization in analysis and creative 
bursts.  Role of metaphores and analogies used in idea generation.  Design process in a teamwork situation. Understanding design process through monitoring team interaction.  Problems of communication between team members.
 ;;Arnbeim R., Visual Thinking, Univ. Of California Press, Berkley, 1969.
Finke R., Creative imagery, Discoveries and Inventions in Visualization, Lawrence Erlbaum, New Jersey, 1990.
Kosslyn S.M., Ghosts in the Monds Machine - creating and using images in the brain, Norton, New York, 1983.
Lawson B., How Designers Think: The Design Process Demystified, Butterworth Architecture, London, 1988.
McKim R., Experiences in visual thinking, Brooks/Cole, California, 1972.
Porter T., How Architects Visualize, Van Nostrand, New York, 1979.
Sommer R., The Minds Eye, Imagery in Everyday life, Delta book, New York,1978.;;
CE 619;Concepts of stability, static, dynamic and energy criteria; Buckling Snap through and post-buckling; stability of colums and beams; Inelastic buckling; Beam-colums; stability of frames; Matrix stiffness and finite element methods applied to stability problems; introduction to stability of plates, shells and stiffened plates.;;Don O. Brush and B.O.Almorth, Buckling of Bare, Plates and Shells, McGraw-Hill, New York 1975.

S.P.Timoshenkoand J.M.Gere, Theory of Elastic Stability, 2nd Edition, McGraw Hill New York, 1961.

A.Chajes, Principles of Structural Stability Theory, Prentice Hall, New York, 1974.

N.G.R.Iyengar, Structural Stability of Plates and Shells (Ellis Horwood Series in Civil Engineering), East-West Press, New Delhi. 

G.J.Simitses, An Introduction to the Elastic Stability of Structures, Prentice Hall, New York, 1976.

Z.P.Bazant and L.Cedolin, Stability of Structures: Elastic, Inelastic, Fracture and Damage theories, Oxford University Press, New York, 1991.
;;
AE 753;Millitary and civil aircraft missions. Flight segments: take-off, climb, cruise loiter, descent, landing. Aircraft CL and CD, drag polar. Propulsive devices. Segment modelling and analysis. Aircraft range/radius of action and endurance. Aircraft aerodynamics by component build up method. Mission analyses for 3 types of aircraft. Mission analyses for 3 types of aircraft. Mission analyses for 3 types of vehicles; Rocket engine and multi-staging; Trajectory simulation; Kill probability; Circular Error Probability and error analysis.
;;Steven Brandt , Randall Stiles, John Bertin and Ray Whitford, Introduction to Aeronautics: A Design Perspective, AIAA Publications, 1997.

Anderson,J.D., Introduction to Flight McGraw Hill, 1989. 

Ojha,S.K., Flight Performance of Aircraft, AIAA Publications, 1995.

Case Studies provided by Aerospace organisations, Aerospace 

Systems Engineering Information Laboratories CASDE.;;
ID 639;Designer Attributes. Setting up a design office, Finding Clients, Business Correspondance, brief & briefing/Letter of contract.  Costing designs and fee estimation.  Management of Design process.Human factor in design management/teamwork. Role of staff designers in R&D activities.  Design evaluation.  Patent & Design Registration laws/procedure. Ethics & Professionalism.;;Farr Michaelm Design Management, Hodder & Stoughton, London, 1966.
Goslett Dorothy, The professional practice of Design, Batszford, London, 1971.
Pulos Arthur J., Contact-selling Industrial Design services, Office of Design Department of industry, Trade & Commerce, Ottawa, 1975.
M.M. Andreasen, Integrated Product Development, IFS Publications LTd/Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1987.
Burstein David & Frank Stasiowski, Project management for the Design professional, Whitney Library of Design, New York, 1982.;;
ID 625;Study of Indian thought and philosophy and its relation to visual communications.  mearning of our festivals, mythology, the nature of religious ceremonies and other cultural diversities.  Study of various Indian visual symbols.  Study of Indian pattern and colours.
Discussion of Indian cultural identiry and its terpretation through visual communications.  Experiments to create design with inherent Indianess.;;Iyer Bharatha K., Indian Art-A Short Introduction, Taraporwala, 1982.
Gandhi Indira, Eternal India, BI Publications, 1980.
Boner, Sharma, Baumer; Vastusutra Upanishad, Motilal Banrasides, New Delhi,1982.;;
AE 755;Engineering design process. Problem formulation in design ; Constraints; Objective function. Constrained and unconstrained optimization problems; Necessary and sufficient conditions for optimality; Kuhn-Tucker conditions; Post-optimality analysis. Numerical methods for unconstrained and constrained nonlinear optimizations; Direct search methods; Steepest descent; Conjugate gradient (Fletcher Reeves); Newton s, DFP & BFGS method; Random walk; Simulated Annealing; Genetic Algorithms; Penalty function approaches; Method of Lagrange multipliers. Introduction to multicriteria optimization (MCO); Decision variables; Integrated problem formulation; Pareto optimum and Min-Max optima; Solution methods based on function scalarisation. Introduction to Multidisciplinary Design Optimization (MDO). Exposure to single level, concurrent subspace and collaborative optimization methods; System and discipline level functions and intercommunication.;;Arora,J.S., Introduction to Optimum Design, McGraw Hill, 1989.

Rao,S.S., Engineering Optimisation - Theory and Applications, New Age International, New Delhi, 1989.

Deb,K., Optimisation for Engineering Dedign: Algorithms and Examples, Pentice-Hall India, 1995.

Osyczka, Multicriterion Optimization in Engineering, John Wiley & Sons, 1984.

Goldberg D.E., Genetic algorithms in Search, Optimisation and Machine Learning, Addison Wesley, 1989.

Van Laarhoven,P.J.M., and Aarts,E.H.L., Simulated Annealing: Theory and Applications, Kulwer Academic Publication, Reidel, Dordecht, 1987 (ISBN 90-277-2573-6).

Research papers in MDO (AIAA papers).
;;
AE 757;The course will include a variety of interaction modes developing competencies in communication, presentation, interpersonal skills and team effort. The interaction modes will include lecturers, one to one discussions, seminar presentations and feed back, group presentations and criticisms, with the participation of faculty.

The lectures will cover self-awareness towards assessment of current competencies, personality traits, communication styles, and communication as applied to groups. The lectures will also involve feedback skills, writing of minutes and summaries, and structured documents.;;Hybels,S., and weaver,R.L., Communicating Effectively, 4th ed. McGraw Hill 1994.

Stewarts,J., Bridges Not Walls: A Book About Interpersonal Communication, 6th ed., McGraw Hill, 1995. 

Kenneth,W.H., and Pearsall,T.E., Reporting Technical Information, Macmillan Publishing Company, NY, 1988.

Robert,M.W., Ed., New Guide to Better Technical Presentation, IEEE Press, NY, 1992.

Edward Cain, B., The Basics of Technical Communicating, ACS Professional Reference Book, Washington DC, 1988.  

Theodore,A. Sherman, and Jackson,S.S., Modern Technical Writing, Prentice-Hall Inc., NJ, 1975.

;;
AE 759;Syatems definitions and concepts. Conceptual system design; Introduction to engineering design and decision making; Requirements capture; Quality Function Deployment; Queuing theory; Design options; Monte Carlo modeling; Engineering microelectronics; Utility theory; Forecasting. Engineering systems modeling. Analysis of system: Reliability; Maintainabiliiity; Serviceability; Disposability and Affordability. Cost and benefit analysis. Methods of decision analysis; State transition matrix models; Modeling the research and development process; Information, System life-cycle modeling and optimization. Game theory; Management of engineering systems design and operation; Programme management with case studies.;;George,A. Hazelrigg, Systems Engineering: An Approach to Information-Based Design, Prentice Hall NJ, 1996.

Benjamin, A., Blanchard, and Walter,J. Fabrycky, Systems Engineering and Analysis, 3rd Ed., Prentice Hall International Series, Industrial & Systems Engg., 1998.

Terry Bahill, Bo Bentz, and Frank Dean, Discovering System Requirements, SAND96-1620, Sandia Report, Sandia National Laboratories, USA, 1999.

http://www.sle.arizona.edu/sysengr/requiremants/

;;
AE 761;Mathematical representation of flight vehicle mechanics & dynamics; Steady, quasi-steady & unsteady aerodynamic models; Modal representation of structural dynamics; Actuator & sensor dynamic representation; Laplace & statespace forms Synthesis of total flight control system; Cascade vs. frequency domain procedures; Control-Structures interaction; Control implementation issues.;;Roskam,J., Airplane Flight Dynamics & Aucomatic Flight Controls - Part I & II, DARCorp Press, 1998.

Nelson, R.C., Flight Stability and Automatic Control, WCB/McGraw Hill, 1998.

Greensite,A.L., Analysis and Design of Space Vehicle Control Systems, Spartan, 1970.

Bernard Etkin, Dynamics of Flight : Stability and Control, John Wiley & Sons, 1995.

Blakelok,J.H., Automatic Control of Aircraft and Missiles Wiley-Interscience, 1991.
;;
AE 763;Importance and role of Avionics; The avionics environment. Air data information and its use; Air data laws and relationships; Air data sensors and computing. Control laws; Redundancy and failure survival; Digital Implementation; 

Fly-by-light control systems; Gyros and accelerometers; Attitude and heading reference systems. Introduction and basic principles of navigation; Radio direction finding; Radio ranges; Hyperbolic system of navigation (LORAN,DECCA): DME and ACAN; Doppler navigation; Inertial navigation: GPS; Terrain reference  navigation. Aids to approach and landing. Head-Up displays: Helmet mounted displays ; Headdown displays. Data fusion. Displays Technology. Control and data entry. Radar and communication FMS. Avionics system integration. Data bus. Introduction to safety systems; EGDWS; SWS; TCAS I & II; ADS-B.
;;Collinson, R.P.G., Introduction to Avionics Champman & Hall, 1996.

Nagaraja,N.S., Elements of Electronic Navigation, Tata McGraw Hill,1996.

Middleton,D.H., Ed., Avionics Systems, Longman Scientific & Technical Publications 1989.

Case studies provided by Aerodpace organisations, Aerospace Systems Engineering Information Laboratory, CASDE.

;;
AE 765;Historical background of Concurrent Engineering(CE). Sequential and concurrent processes; Definition and framework of CE; Decomposition of product development stages; Implementation of CE; Role of Information Technology in CE; Examples of CE applications. Integration of dedign and manufacturing; Design evaluation for manufacturing cost; Design process optimization for CE; Role of CAD/CAM and automation in CE  , Virtual reality and Rapid Prototyping. Design for manufacturing - case studies; Design for reliability, maintainability and reparability and their implication on CE. CE application to composite structures; Stuctural design using composite materials. Mechanical properties and design parameters of composite materials. Composite manufacturing processes with emphasis on manufacturing time, quality and cost; Case studies on design for manufacturing of composite structural elements.
 ;;Biren Prasad, Concurrent Engineering: Fundamentals, Vols. I & II, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1996.

Andrew Kuslak, Concurrent Engineering, Automation, Tools and Techniques, John Wiley & Sons Inc, 1993.

Backhouse,C.J., and Bookes, Concurrent Engineering, Engg., Engineering Optimization, Vol. 18, pp. 235-262., 1992.

Case studies provided by Aerospace organisations, Aerospace organisations, Aerospace Systems Engineering Information Laboratory, CASDE.

;;
AE 767; Intelligent displays management, Flight management systems. Avionics systems integration. Data bus sustems. Integrated modular avionics. Case studies for aircraft, missile and satellites. Terminal guidance systems. 

Telemetry systems. Man-machine interface. Electronic warfare (anti jamming). Multimode radar systems. 

;AE 763;Collinson, R.P.G., Introduction to Avionics, Chapman & Hall, 1996.

Middleton,D.H. Ed., Avuibucs systems, Longman Scientific & Technical Publications, 1989.

Case studies provided by Aerospace organisations, Aerospace Systems Engineering Information Laboratory, CASDE.
;;
CL 692;Continuous time modelling of physical systems.
Discretisation: Sampling theorem, Zero Order Hold, Computational issues.
System Concepts: Linearity, Time invariance, Casuality.
Input-Output models: Impulse and step response models convolution, external stability.
Z Transforms: Motivation, zeros and poles, region of convergence, stability and casuality, Inverse Z-Transforms.
Dynamic behaviour of Z-domain Transfer Functions: Dependence on pole location, performance specification, desirable pole-zero location, Frequency response.
Identification: Parameter estimation, recursive parameter estimation, goodness of estimate.
Classical Control Design: PID Control, Direct digital control.
State space techniques: Pole placement, controllability  observability, limitations on performance, deterministic estimator compensator Optimal Control: Linear quadratic regulator, Kalman filter, Selection of Weights. 
Relation between S-domain and Z-domain transfer functions: Forward, backward and trapezoidal rules.
;;Astrom K.J. and Wittenmark B., Computer controlled Systems: Theory and Design, 2nd 
Edition, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi, 1994.
Franklin G.F., Powell J.D., and Workman M.L., Digital Control of Dynamic Systems, 2nd 
Edition, Addison Wesley, Reading, 1990.
;;
CL 687;History and Relation of Artificial Intelligence (AI) to Process Engineering;  Knowledge Representation I - Predicate calculus and Semantic Networks;  Search - Forward/ Backward, Depth/breadth/best - first search;  Production Systems: History, Components;  Knowledge Representation II - Frames, Objects;  Inexact Reasoning - Introduction, Bayesian Certainty Factors;  Qualitative Physics, Causal Models - Introduction, Blackboard Architecture;  Expert Systems - Applications to Industry;  Programming Languages;  Expert System Shells;  Neural Nets - Introduction and Application to Process Engineering.;;N.L. Nilsson, Problem Solving Methods in Artificial Intelligence, McGraw Hill, 1971.
T.E. Quantrille and Y.A. Liu, Artificial Intelligence in Chemical Engineering, Academic Press, 1991.
J. Zuarda, Introdction to Artificial Neural Systems, West Pub. Co., St. Paul, MN, 1992.
J.F. Davis, G. Stephanopoulos and V. Venkatasubramanian, Intelligent Systems in Process Engineering, AIChE Symposium Series, Volume 92, 1996.
;;
ME 615;Single degree of freedom system: Differential equation, complex exponential method of solution, energy method, power relations, phase relations, Nyquist diagram.

Damping and modal analysis: Damping mechanisms, characterization and behavior of typical damping materials, structural response of multi-degree of freedom (MDOF) damped structures, proportional damping, modal testing, MDOF formulation using Finite Element Method (FEM), application of modal analysis in vibration reduction.
Random vibration: Ensemble averages, stationary and ergodic processes, autospectrum, cross-spectrum, Fast Fourier transform, spectrum analysis, Hilbert transform.

Vibration measurement: Accelerometers, force gages, instrumented hammers, Fast Fourier transform analyzers and digital filters, applications in vibration measurement.

Vibration of beams: Differential equation from Newton"s law and Lagrange equation, boundary conditions, natural frequency and mode shapes, force excitation, dynamic stresses in beams.

Machinery Diagnostics: Diagnostic procedures for typical machinery like motors, pumps, diesel engines, gearboxes etc.
;;R.H.Lyon, Machinery Noise and Diagnostics, 
Butterworths, 1986.
S.G.Kelly, Fundamentals of Mechanical              
Vibrations, McGraw-Hill, 1993.
S.P.Timoshenko, W. Weaver and D.H.Young,  
Vibration Problems in Engineering, John 
Wiley & Sons, 1990.
D.J.Ewins, Modal Testing: Theory and Practice, 	Research Studies Press, 1995.
;;
ME 749;Multiple degrees of freedom systems.  Transient vibrations, vibration of shafts, applications of Lagrange"s equations, instruments for generating, measuring and recording shock, vibration and noise.  Basic noise theory.  Noise pollution and counter measures.  Applications in industry, e.g. vibration isolation, rotor balancing, concrete mixing, pile driving, etc.  Physiological effects of vibration.                                                                          ;;L.Meirovitch, Elements of Vibration Analysis, 
	McGraw-Hill, 1986.
W.T.Thompson, Theory of Vibrations and       
	Applications, CBS Publ, 1988.
C.M.Harris, Shock and Vibration Handbook, 
	McGraw-Hill, 1996.
L.L.Beranek and L.V.Istvan, Noise and Vibration 
	Control Engineering : Principles and           
	Applications, McGraw Hill, 1992.
J.N.McDuff and J.R.Curreri, Vibration Control, 
	McGraw-Hill, 1958.
;;
CE 759;Introduction to traffic and transportation structures; Classification of bridges; General considerations of sub-substructure design; Properties of members of variable section, Slope-deflection and moment distribution methods for analysis of continuois beams and frames of variable section with special application to bridges and multi-storey car parks; analysis of circular griders; Approximate analysis of steel and reinforced concrete continuous circular bridges; General matrix formulation for analysis of frames.;;P. Andersed, Statically Indeterminate Structures, Ronald Press Company, New York.

S.Ponnuswamy, Bridge Engineering, Tata Mcgraw-Hill Publishing Company, New Delhi, 1990.

D.J.Victor, Essentials of Bridge Engineering, Oxford and IBH Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd. 

G.S.Pandit and S.P.Gupta, Structural Analysis, A Matrix Approach, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing, New Delhi, 1999.

L.S.Negi and R.S. Jangid, Analysis of Structures, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1997.

S.C. Chapra and R.P.Canale, Numerical Methods for Engineers, 3rd Edition, McGraw Hill, Singapore, 1998.

W.H.Press, S.A.Teukolsky, W.T.Vellerling and B.P.Flannery, Numerical Recipes in FORTRAN, 2nd Edition, Cambridge University Press, 1998.

;;
CE 703;Drainage analysis, topographic analysis Planimetric mapping , rainfall analysis. Preparation of the matic maps, interpretation of images, stereo images.;;;;
CS 625;Introduction 
Theoretical Approaches: Inductive Inference, Grammatical Inference PAC Learning. Complexity of Learning, polynomial learnability, VC-dimension.

Methodologies: parametric learning, language learning, explanation based learning, learning using exemplars, algorithms, learning in neural nets, multistrategy learning.

Automatic program construction from example computations, inference of LISP and logic programs, inference of decision trees and finite automata.

Architecture of machine learning programs, ID5, C4.5 etc. 

Applications of Machine Learning to Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery.
;Nil;Anthony,M. and Biggs,N., Computational Learning Theory, Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1992.

Michalewicz,Z., Genetic Algorithms + Data Structures = Logic Programs, Springer, 1992.

Bergadano F. and Gunetti D., Inductive Logic Programming, MIT Press, 1996.

Goldberg D.E., Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization and Machine Learning, Addison-wesley, 1989.

Ross Q.J., C4.5: Programs for machine learning, Morgan Kaufmann, 1997.

U.M.Fayyad et.al., Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining MIT Press, 1986.

 ;;
EE 669;Enviornment for VLSI technology:
clean room and safety requirements, Wafer cleaning process and wet chemical etching techniques.
Impurity incorporation : solid state diffusion modelling and technology, ion implementation modelling, technology and damage annealing; characterisation of impurity profiles.
Oxidation: kinetics of silicon dioxide growth both for thick, thin and ultrathin films, Oxidation technologies in VLSI and ULSI; characterisation of oxide films, High k and low k dielectrics for ULSI.;;C.Y. Chang and S.M. Sze (Ed), ULSI TEchnology, McGraw-Hill Companies 
Inc., 1996.
S.K.Gandhi, VLSI fabrication Principles, John wiley Inc., New York, 1983.
S.M.Sze(Ed), VLSI Technology, 2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill, 1988.
;;
CS 631;Introduction to Relational Model, Relational Algebra, Storage Structures, Indexing, Query Procesing Algorithms, Wxternal Sorting, Query Optimization, Buffer Management, Concurrency Control, Recovery.

;Nil;Database System Concepts, 3rd Ed, Silberschatz, Korth & Sudarshan, McGraw-Hill 1997.

Fundamentals of Database Systems, Third Edition, Benjamin Cummings, Ramez Elmasri and Shamkant Navathe, 1999.

Selected Papers from Leading Journals and Conference Proceedings.

;;
EE 671; Review of MOS transistor models, CMOS logic families including static, dynamic and dual rail logic. Integrated circuit layout; design rules, parasites.  Building blocks, ALU"s, FIFO"s counters, VLSI design: data and control path design, floor planning, Design Technology: introduction to hardware description languages(VHDL), logic, circuit and layout verification.  Design examples.;;N. Weste and K. Eshranghian, Principles of CMOS VLSI Design, Addison Wesley, 1985.
L.Glaser and D. Dobberpuhl, The nDesign and Analysis of VLSI Circuits, Addison WESLey 1985.
C.MEad and L. Conway, Introduction to VLSI Systems, Addison Wesley, 1979.
Perry, VHDL, 2nd Ed, McGraw Hill International, 1995.;;
CS 643;Motivation for distributed operating systems. Design issues in distributed operating systems.

Design of distributed file systems - transparency and scalability. The reliability hiererchy - recovery, tolerance and resiliency. Resiliency techniques in distributed systems.

Protection structures in distributed systems. Capabilities in hardware and software. Security concerns in distributed systems. Capabilities in hardware and software. Security concerns in distributed systems. Security models. Kerberos authentication system.

Algorithms for distributed control - mutual exclusion, deadlock handling, termination  detection.

(Note : Some topics may be added/deleted to suit specific offerings of the course.)
;Exposure to UG cours;M.Singhal, N.Shivaratri: Advanced concepts in operating systems, McGRaw Hill, 1994.

A.S. Tanenbaum : Modern operating systems, Prentice Hall, 1993.

Research papers from selected journals.

;;
CS 681;Stochastic Processes and their classification; Markov chains, Transient and long run analysis of Markov chains; Phase dependent stochastic processes; Embedded Markov chains analysis; Renewal and renewal reward processes; Selected case studies.
;Nil;L.Kleinrock, Queueing Systems, Vol.I Theory, John Wiley, 1975.

M.K.Molloy, Fundamentals of Performance Modelling, Macmillan, 1989.

K.Kant, Introduction To Computer Sustem Performance Evaluation, <cGraw-Hill, 1992.

;;
CS 687;2D Signals and Systems including FIR, IIR filters and z-transforms. Image Enhancement, Filtering and Restoration. Image Warping and Interpolation kernels. Image Compression. Software to demonstrate concepts from above will be covered. ;;Digital image Processing, Gonzalves and Woods, Addison Wesley 1993.

Digital Picture Processing, Rosenfield and Kak, Academic Press 1982.

Image Processing Handbook, Russ, Addision Wesley, 1994.

Digital Image Processing, Gonzalves and Woods, Addison Wesley 1993.

Digital Picture Processing, Rosenfield and Kak, Academic Press 1982.

Image Processing Handbook, Russ, Addision Wesley,  1994.

Digital Image warping, G.Wolberg. IEEE Press, 1984.
;;
GS 667;Surface and subsurface data collection and description. Correlation of stratigraphic units and biostratigraphy. Criteria for recognition of various depositional environments, palaeobathymetry and palaeotemperature estimation. Facies concept, carbonate and clasticfacies models. Basin mapping - structure and isopach contouring, lithofacies and biofacies maps, preparation of strategic cross sections and palaeogrographic synthesis. Regional and global stratigraphic cycles. MEchanisms of sedimantary basin formation. Basin classification and their characteristics. Economic significance of basin analysis. Case studies of Indian sedimentary basins.

;;Miall,A.D. Principles of sedimentary basin analysis, (2nd ed.), Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1990.

Allen,P.A. and Allen, J.R.Basin Analysis - principles and applications, Blackwell Scientific Pub. London, 1990.;;
GS 669;Introduction to photogrammetry optics, principles of photography, photographic films, filters, aerial cameras. Vertical photographs - scale, ground coordinates, relief displacement, flying height, stereoscopic viewing, stereoscopic parallax, principles of floating point and stereoscopic methods of parallax measurement, elevations by paralax differences, vertical exageration. Radial line triangulation, planimetric map revosopm, ground control for aerial photography, aerial mosaics. Tilted photographs, stereoscopic plotting instruments. Ortho-photography. Ortho-photography. Air photo interpretation for earth scientists.

;;Wolf,P.R. Elements of Photogrammetry, McGraw Hill, 1974.

Moffitt,F.H. and Mikhail,E.M. Photogrammetry, Harper and Row Inc., 1980.

Rampal,K.K. Textbook of photogrammetry, Oxford and IBH Publ. Co., 1982.

Slama,C.C.(Ed.) Manual of Photogrammetry, Amer. Soc. of Photogrammetry, 1980.
;;
CE 673; Occurance of groundwater, types of aquifiers, groundwater in different formations, groundwater movement, mechanics of well flow, exact solutions of flow to fully and partially, penetrating wells in confined aquifiers, non leady aquifers, unconfinedflow to well, approximate solutions, aquifer tests, well design criteria, groundwater control.

Techniwues of artificial recharge, solution to transient problems of groundwater mounds, system groundwater quality, seawater intrusion into foastal aquifers, approximate solutions, multiple well systems, hydrogeologic systems analysis digital and analog models for evaluation of aquifer response, groundwater development and management. ;;Raghunath H.M. Groundwater, 2nd Ed., Wiley Eastern,New Delhi, 1987.

Freaze R.A. and Cherry J.A., Groundwater, Prentice-Hall, Englewood cliffs, 1979.

Ruston,K.R. and Redshaw ,S.C., Seapage and Groundwater Flow, Arnold, London, 1976.

Todd,D.K. Groundwater hydrology, 2nd Ed. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1980.
   
;;
MA 401;    Systems of linear equations: matrices and elementary row operations, Gaussian elimination, LU decomposition.
Vector Spaces: subspaces, bases and dimension, coordinates.
Linear Transformations: representation of linear transformations by matrices, rank-nullity theorm, duality and transpose, determinants.
Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors: minimal and characteristic polynomials, Diagonalization, Schur"s theorem, Cayley Hamilton theorem, Jordan Canonical form.
Inner Product spaces: Gram-Schmidt orthonormalization, reflectors, QR decomposition using reflectors, least squares problem, adjoint of an operator, unitary operators, rigid motions, positive(semi) definite matrices, minimum principles and Rayleigh quotients, matrix norms, condition numbers.
Eigenvalue computation: power and inverse power methods, QR method.
;;M. Artin, Algebra, Prentice Hall of India, 1994.

K. Hoffman and R. Kunze, Linear Algebra, Prentice Hall of India, 1991.

B. Noble and J.W. Daniel, Applied Linear Algebra, 2nd ed., Prentice Hall, 1977.

G. Strang, Linear Algebra and Its Applications, 3rd ed., Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, San Diego, 1988.

D.S. Watkins, Fundamentals of Matrix Computations, Wiley, 1991.;;
GS 851; The global framework. The earth"s crust and upper mantle-seismic, magnetic and gravity studies. Heat and thermal properties-measure-ment of terestrial heat flow, sources of heat and temperature distribution in the earth. Earth-quake -characteristics, effects and distribution. Sea floor spreading and plate tectonics - tectonic activity at plate margins and within plates.  Tectonic history of rifts, hot-spots, aseismicridges. Plate movement, causes of plate tectonics, palateodynamics.
;;P.J.Smith: Topics is grophysics. The Open University Press, 1973.

P.J.Wyllie: The dynamic earth.Wiley, New York, 1971.

C.M.R. Fowler: Solid earth: An introduction to global geophysics. Cambridge Univ. Press, 1990.


;;
GS 853;Mass spectrometry. Ion wxchange chromatography. Decay mechanism of radioactive atoms and decay growth.  Isotope geology of Sr, Nd, Pb and Ar, and their applications in petrology. Stable isotope studies of O,H,S,C, and He and their applications in petrology, ore geology, hydrogeochemistry and palaeoclimatology isotopic tracers.
;;Dickin,A.P. Radiogenic isotope geology Cambridge, 1995.

Geyh,M.A. and Schleicher,H, 1990.

Faure,G. Principles of isotope geology John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1997.
;;
GS 855; Evolution og msgmas, assimilation-fractional crystallisation processes, tectonism vs magmatism; interpreting geochemical data; certain important Indian case histories. ;;Rollinson,H. Using geochemical data - evaluation, presentation and interpretation Longman Scientific and Technical, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1993.

Cox,K.G., Bell,J.D. and Pankhurst,R.J. Interpretation of igneous rocks, George Allen and Unwin Pub., 1979.

Wilson, M. Igneous petrogenesis, Unwin Hyman Pub., London, 1989. ;;
EE 677;Matrices: Linear dependence of vectors, solution of linear equations, bases of vector spaces. orthogonality, complementary orthogonal spaces and solution spaces of linear equations.
Graphs: representation of graphs using matrices; paths, connectedness; circuits, cutsets, trees; fundamentals circuit and cutset matrices; voltage and current spaces of a directed graph and their complementary orthogonality.
Algorithms and data structures: efficient representation of graphs; elementary graph algorithms involving bfs and dfs trees, such as finding connected and 2-connected components of a graph, the minimum spanning tree, shortest path between a pair of vertices in a graph;;;K. Hoffman and R.E. Kunze, Linear Algebra, Prentice Hall(India), 1986.
N. Balabanian and T.A. Bickart, Linear Network Theory; Analysis, Properties, Design and Synthesis, Matrix Publishers, Inc., 1981.
T. Cormen, C.Leiserson and R.A. Rivest 
Algorithms, MIT press and McGraw Hill, 1990.;;
GS 857;Sedimentation process model, concept of size, shape, their measurement, processing and statistical inference. Depositional environments and analysis by multivariate methods. Models for clastic and carbonate sedimentation. Basin development.
;;Griffiths,J.C. Methods of analysis of sesediments, McGraw Hill, 1967.

Petijohn, F.J. and Ootter,S. Sands and sandstone, Springer 1972.;;
EE 707; Theory: Introduction to Unix: circuit simulation using SPICE, application of SPICE for analog design.  Timing simulation with IRSIM, Design of static and dynamic digital circuits with IRSIM. Layouts of integrated circuits. Use of the layout tool MAGIC for analog and digital integrated circuits.
Laboratory: TUtorials on unix and vi. Tutorials and design exerciese on linear circuits design with SPICE; Tutorial and exercises on digital design and timing analysis using IRSIM.
Tutorials and exercises on IC layout using MAGIC; Group projects on design, analysis and layout of integrated circuits. ;;R.Thomas and J. Yates, A user Guide to the Unix System, McGraw Hill International, 1985.
N.Weste and K. Eshraghian, Principles of CMOS VLSI, 2e, Design and Addison Wesley, 1992.
SPICE3 users"Guide: On line documentation.
IRSIM Users"Guide: On line documentation.
MAGIC Users"Guide: On line documentation.;;
GS 859;Structiral types and atomic raplacements in ore minerals, stabilities of ore minerals in select multicomponent systems, ore mineral stabilities in aqueous systems and activities of complex ions in ore fluids. Fluid inclusion studies for geothermobarometry and recognition of fluid geothermobarometry and recognition of fluid components. Growth and growth structures due to annealing and deformation. Ore textures and their origin. Important mineral associations in different genetic groups.;;Stanton,R.L. Ore petrology, McGraw Hill, 1972.
Shepherd,T., Rankin,A.H. and Alderton, D.H.M. A practical guide to fluid inclusion studies, Blackie, London, 1985.

Barnes,H.L. Geochemistry of hydrothermal deposits, 3rd Ed., John Wiley & Sons, 1997.
;;
EE 679;Speech production and acoustic phonetics, speech perception.
Speech analysis: time and frequency domain techniques for pitch and format estimation, cepstral and LPC analysis.
Speech synthesis: articulatory, formant, and LPC synthesis, voice response and text-to-speech systems.
Applications: data compression, vecoders, speech enhancement, speech recognition, speaker recognition, aids for the speech and hearing impairments.;;D O"Shaughnessy, Speech Communication: Human and Machine, Addison Wesley, 1987.
L R Rabiner and RW Schafer, Digital Processing of speech Signals, Prentice Hall, 1978.
J L Flanagan, Speech Analysis, Synthesis and Perception, Springer Verlag, 1972.;;
SI 409; Illustration of techniques and concepts from combinatorics and graph theory through programming exercises.
Either an interpreted language such as Scheme or the language of Mathematica should be used for the programming exercises.
;;N. Biggs, Discrete Mathematics, Oxford/Clarendon Press, 1985.

R. Dromey, How to Solve it By Computer, Prentice Hall India ,1996.

Donald Knuth, Fundamental Algorithms, Narosa Publishers, 1985.;;
MG 663; Introduction to Cost Accounting, Cost Accounting System, Marginal/Direct Costing, Breakeven Analysis, Cost Analysis for Decision-Making. Budgeting and Budgetary Control, Standard Costing and Variance Analysis Control of Decentralised Operations: Responsibility Accounting, Transfer Pricing. New Developments in Management Accounting: Activity Based Costing, Cost Management in the Context of Corporate Strategy. Project Costing: Project Cost Accounting, Cost Reduction and Audit. Technology Costing: Fixed Assets, Investment in New Technology, Evaluation of Risk and Determination of Technology Investment Strategy.
;;C.T. Horngren, Accounting for Management Control: An introduction, Prentice Hall, New Delhi, 1976.
M.A. Pocock and A. H. Taylor, Handbook of Financial Planning and Control, Gower, Westmead, 1981.
J. H. Rossell, W.W. Frasure and D.H. Taylor, Managerial Accounting, 3rd ed., Merrill, Columbus, 1980.

;;
ES 611;Acquatic Chemistry : Chemistry equilibria and kinetics fundamentals; Acids and bases; Titrations; Acidity; Alkalinity; Buffers and buffer intensity; Chemical equilibrium calculations; pC-pH diagram.

Precipitation and dissolution; Water softening and water conditioning; Langelier index; Solubility diagram; Coexistence of phases in equilibrium; Complixation of metal ions and organic complexes in natural water.

Oxidation and reduction reactions stoichiometry; Redox couples; pE-pH diagrams; Redox control in natural systems; Basic concepts of organic and colloid chemistry.

Soil Chemistry : Weathering reactions; Structure and surface reactions of clays and oxides; Forces at soil-water interfaces.

Atmospheric Chemistry : Chemical equilibria and kinetics; Photo-dissociation and free radical reactions; Chemistry of precipitation; Acid rain.
;;Sawyer,C.N., McCarty,P.L., and Parkin,G.F., Chemistry for Environmental Engineering, McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, 1994.

Manahan,S.E., Fundamentals of Environmental Chemistry, Lewis Publishers, Inc., Boca Raton, 1993.

Sposito,G., Surface Chemistry of Soils, Oxford University Press, New York, 1984.

Stumm,W., and Morgan,J.J., Aquatic Chemistry : An introduction Emphasizing Chemical Equilibria in Natural Waters, 2nd Edition, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1981.
;;
MM 671;Crystal Structure, Imperfections: Point Defects, Dislocations, Grain Boundaries, solid solutions, Phase equilibria, Phase diagrams, Iron-carbon system: Development of microstructure.
Diffusion and diffusion mechanisms. Phase transformations: Nucleation and growth. Mechanical Behaviour of Metals, Elastic and Plastic Deformation: Stress strain curve, Hardness, Toughness: Strengthening Mechanisms: Dislocation & plastic Deformation, slip systems.  Deformation by twinning, Grain size strengthening, Solid solution Hardening, Strain Hardening.  Heat Treatment: Martensitic transformation, TTT and CCT curves, Annealing, hardening and tempering, Hardenability, Recovery & Recrystallization and Grain Growth.  Fracture Fatigue, Creep.;;R.W. Cahn and P. Hassen, Physical Metallurgy, North-Holland Physics Publishers, 1983.
T.H. Courtney, Mechanical Behaviour of Materials, McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., 1990.
Z.D. Jastrzelaski, The Nature and Properties of Engineering Materials, JohnWiley and Sons, 1987.;;
ES 613; Definition; Classification; Examples of models for environmental systems. Introduction to air quality models; Meteorology; Atmospheric stability and turbulence; Gaussian plume model and modifications; NUmerical models, Urban diffusion models, Calibration and sensitivity analysis; Applications of public domain models, and software, Global radiation balance and climatic changes.

Transport and fate of pollutant in acquatic systems; Introduction to river, estuarine and lake hydrodynamics; Stratification and eutrophication of lakes; Dissolved oxygen model for streams; Temperature models.

Transport and fate of pollutants in soils and ground water; Utility of environmental models for forecasting.

Computational methods in environmental modelling.
;;Seinfeld,J.H., and Pandis,S.N., Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, JOhn Wiley and Sons, Inc., Environmental Modelling, Inter Sc. Publ., New York, 1998.

Schnoor,J.L., Environmental Modelling, Inter Sc. Publ., 1996.

Boubel,R.W..,Fox, D.L., Turner,D.B., and Stern, A.C., Fundamentals of Air Pollution, Academic Press, New York, 1994.

Thomann,R.V., and Muller,J.A., Principles of Surface Water quality Modelling and Control, Harper International Edition, New Delhi, 1987.

Tchobanoglous, G., Schroeder, E.D., Water quality, Addison - Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, Massachusetts, 1987.;;
MM 673;Structure of ceramics and glasses.  Thermal properties- heat capacity, thermal expansion & streee, thermal conduction. Electrical and Dielectric Properties - Electrical conduction: electronic & ionic conduction, electron mobility. Semiconductivity: Instrinsic and Extrinsic semiconductors, Dielectric Behaviour: Types of polarization, Frequency dependence of dielectric permittivity, piezo and ferroelectricity.  Optional properties: interaction of radiation with wolids, Reflections, Absorption, Transmission, colour.  Luminescence, photo conductivity Lasers, Magnetic properties: Dia-,Pera-, ferro-,ferri-,and antiferro-magnetism, Magnetic Domains, and hysteresis loops.
Polymers- Polymer structure, polymerisation, processing.  Composite - Particle reinforced & fibre reinforced composites.;;L.L. Hench and J.K. West, Principles of Electronic Ceramics, John Wiley, NY 1990.
A.R. West, Solid State Chemistry and its Applications, john Wiley, NY 1992.
Z.D. Jastrzelaski, The Nature and properties of Engineering Materials, John Wiley, NY 1987.
;;
MM 649;Surface phenomena in metallurgical processes, Cryogenic materials, Special fabrication techniques, Grindiang and cutting media, Microfabrication techniques, Measurements techniques.;;;;
ES615;Introduction to urban and metropolitan regoinal planning; Water quality and effluent standards; Issues related to water supply and disposal of wastewater; Water demand forecasting and management.

Environmental hydraulics : Flow in pipes; Multiport diffuser outfalls; Flow in open channels; Pumps-system-head curve and pump head curve, Hydraulic profile computations of water and wastewater treatment plant.

Water treatment and distribution systems; Network design; Municipal wastewater collection; Coomputer packages for the design of water distribution and wastewater collection system.
;;Manual on Sewerage and Sewage Treatment, 2nd Edition, Ministry of Urban Development, New Delhi, 1993.

Manual of Water Supply and Treatment, 3rd Edition, Ministry of Urban Development, New Delhi, 1991.

Walski,T.M.,  Gessler,J., and Sjostorm,J.W., Water Distribution Systems: Simulation and Sizing, Lewis Publisher, Michigan, 1990.

Peavy, H.S. Rowe,D.R., and Techobanoglous, G., Evironmental Engineering, McGraw Hill Book Company, Singapore, 1985.

Benefield,L.D., Judkins,J.F., and Parr, A.D., Treatment Plant Hydraulics for Environmental Engineers, Prentice-Hall Inc., New Jersey, 1984.


;;
MM 653;Stereographic Projections, X-ray diffraction, crystal structure and phase identification, resudual stress measurement and other applications, Outline of thermal analysis technique, description, of DTA/DSC/TGA techniques and instrumentation. applications and case studies. Optical microscopy  - light optics, microscope components, possibilities and limitations.  SCanning Electron Microscopy - Optics and performance of a SEM, Image interpretation, crystallographic information in a SEM, analytical microscopy.  Transmission ELectron microscopy - construction and operation of aTEM, electron diffraction, Image interpretation.;;Metals handbook Vol.9 " Characterisation of Materials", 10th Edition, American Society of Meatls, Metals Park, OH, USA., 1986.
H.H. Willard, L.L. Merrit, J.A. Dean and F.A. Settle, " Instrumental Methods of analysis", 6th edition, CBS Publishers & Distributors, Delhi, 1986.;;
MM 657;General principles of materials selection and design based on requirements of functrion, property, processability and cost.  Quantitative methods of materials selection, normalization of properties weighting factors, materials performace index. Introduction to design codes, criteria for material qualification and acceptance for important applications.  Introduction and use of materials data bases, hand books etc.  Illustrative examples of materials selection for aircraft wings, cutting tools, gas turbine blades, liquid nitrogen containers, artificial hip replacements, automobile value spring etc.
;;N.A. Waterman and M.F. Ashby, The Materials Selector, Vol I, II and III, Chapman and Hall, London, 1996.;;
MM 659;REview of fundamentals in fluid flow, heat transfer and mass transfer.  Introduction of turbulent flow phenomena.  Heat transfer with phase change.  A few detailed examples of transport phenomena applications to materials processing.;;R.B. Bird, W.E. Stewart and E.N. Lightfoot; Transport Phenomena, McGraw-Hill, N.Y., 1960.
M. Lesieur, Turbulence in Fluids, M. Nijhoff Pub., Dordrecht, 1987.
W. Kurz and D.J. Fischer, " Fundamentals of Solidifications" TRans TEch., Pub., 1986.;;
MM 655;Methodology in modelling. Types of models, Transport phenomena based models, population balance based models, Statistical Models, Examples taken form engineering and sciences.;;R. Aris, Mathematical Modelling Techniques, Pitman London, 1978.;;
MM 663; Quantitative metallography, heat treatmnet and evaluation of mechanical properties, X-ray diffraction, DSC, surface energy measurement, induction melting and electroslag remelting, atomic absorption spectrometry, determination of magnetic properties, formability tests, evaluation of casting properties and moulding sand properties.;;K. Tien and J.F. Elliott(eds), Metallurgical Treaties, Metall. Soc. AIME,1981.
G.E. Dieter, Mechanical Metallurgy, McGraw Hill Book CO.,(Third Edition), 1988.
G.A. Higgerson, Experiments in materials Technology, Affiliated East-West Press, 1973.
B. Chalmers and A.G. Quarrel(eds). The Physical Examination of Metals(2nd edition), Edward Arnold(Publishers)ltd., 1960.;;
GS 619;Mass transport mechanisms; Ideal reactors; Non-idealities; Mass balance in various reactor configurations.

Particle separation processes; Coagulation and flocculation processes; Coagulation and flocculation processes; Particle surface charge, surface potential and stability of colloidal dispersions; Sedimentation and flotation processes; Gravity thickeners, clarifiers and floatation processes; Gravity thickeners, clarifiers and floatation processes; Graviry thickeners, clarifiers and flotation systems; Filtration and ultrafiltration processes; Modeling approaches for rapid sand filters.

Solute separation processes; Gas transfer processes; Diffused and surface aeration and air stripping of volatile contaminations in packed tower;;;;;
MM 677;Fick"s laws and the atomistic theory of diffusion. Impurity diffusion in pure metals. Diffusion in dilute and concentrated binary alloys. Grain boundary and surface diffusion. Determination of diffusion coefficients.  Diffusion in ionic solids, optical materials, semiconductors, optical materials, amorphous semoconductors, thin films, anomalous diffusion.;;P.G. Shewmon, Diffusion in solids, TMS, Warrandale, 1989.
F. J. Kedves, and D.L. Beke(Ed.), DIMETA-82: Diffusion in Metals and Alloys, Trans. Tech. Publications, 1983.
J.S. Kirkaldy and D.J. Young, Diffusion in the Condensed State, The Institute of Metals, 1987.
;;
MM 675;Minerals and ores, their communication and beneficiation, agglomeneration and sintering. General methods of pyro, hydro- and electro-metallurgy of metals from oxide, sulphide and halide ores, refining of metals.  Material and thermal balances.  Secondary metals and utilisation of metallurgical wastes, enviornmental considerations. Extractive metallurgy of copper and aluminium.  Principles and process in iron ore reduction and steelmaking.  Corrosion and properties of metals.;;H.S. Ray, R. Sridhar and K.P. Abraham, Extraction of non-ferrous metals, Affiliated East west press, 1985.
C. Bodsworth and H.B. Bell, Physical Chemistry of Iron and Steelmaking, Elsevier, 1972.
H.S. Ray and A. Ghosh, Principles of Extractive Metallurgy, Wiley Eastern, 1991.;;
MM 679;Structure and properties of liquid metals.  Thermodynamcis of molten iron alloys.  Structure of molten ionic and polymeric melts.  Ionic theory of slags, Thermodynamics and kinetics of slag metal reactions.  Reactions in dispersed systems.  Homogenerous and heterogeneous nucleation.  Interaction of gas streams and jets with steel baths.  REactions of carbon phosphorous and sulphur.  Gases and inclusions in steel.  Study of steelmaking systems. Advances in steel making and casting.;;T.A. Engh, Principles of metal REfining, Oxford Univ.Press,Oxford, 1992.
C. Bodsworth and H.B.Bell, : Phy. Chem. of Iron and Steel Manufacture, Longman, 1972.
F.D. Richardson : "Phy. Chem. Of Melts", Vol 1 and 2, Academic Press, 1976.
E.T. Turkdogan: " Principles of 
Pyrometallurgy", Academic Press, 1980.
F. Oeters: Metallurgy of Steelmaking, Verlag Stahleisen mbH, Dusseldorf, 1994.;;
ES 619; Mass transport mechanisms; Ideal reactors; Non-idealities; Mass balance in various reactor configurations.

Particle separation processes; Coagulation and flocculation processes; Particle surface charge, surface potential and stability of colloidal dispersions; Filtration and ultrafiltration processes; Modeling approaches for rapid sand filters.

Solute separation processes; Gas transfer processes; Diffused and surface aeration and air stripping of volatile contaminants in packed tower; Adsorption and ion exchange processes; Sorption isotherm models and rates considerations, Sorpisotherm models and rates considerations, Sorption in completely mixed and packed bed reactiors; Precipitation processes; Reverse osmosis and electrodialysis.

Species transformation processes; Chemicals oxidation/Reduction processes; Disinfection using chlorine and UV.

;;Weber,W.J.Jr., and F.A.DiGiano, Process Dynamics in Environmental Systems, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 1996.

Metcalf and Eddy, Wastewater Engineering: Treatment, Disposal and Reuse., 3rd Edition, McGrawhill Book Company, Singapore, 1991.

Humenick,M.J., Water and Wastewater Treatment, Marcel and Dekker, New York, 1977.

Weber,W.J.Jr., Physiochemical Processes for Water Qiality Control, JOhn Wilsy and Sons Inc., New York, 1972.

;;
MM 681;Molecular theory of deformation kinetics. Rate theory of plastic deformation.  Micormechanistic approach for deformation behaviour of single crystals and polycrystals.  Low temperature deformation of metals and other crystalline colids. Dynamic strain aging, creep, internal stress.
Deformation of intermetallic compounds.
Substructural evolution at large strains.  Recovery, recrystallization and grain growth during high temperature deformation. Formation cells boundaries, slip in a cell structure and composite model of time dependent flow.;;R.W. Cahn, P.Haasen and E.J. Kramer(eds),  Materials Science and Technology, Vol6, Plastic DEformation and Fracture of materials, H. Mughrabi(vol.ed.), VCH,1993.
G. Krasus(ed.), Deformation, Processing and Structure, ASM, 1984.
S. Krausz and H. Eyring, Deformation kinetics, JohnWiley and Sons, 1975.
T.N. Baer(Ed.,), Yield, flow and fracture of Polycrystals, Applied Science Publishers Ltd., 1983.
R.J. Arsenault(Ed.) PLastic Deformation of Materials: Treatise on Materials Science and Technology, Vol.6, Academic Press, 1975.;;
ES 621; Introduction to biological wastewater treatment processes; MIcrobiology of aerobic waterwater treatment plants; Biochemical reactions ( carbon oxidation, nitrification, denitrification, biological phosphorus uptake and removal of specific pollutants), Stochiometry and kinetics of boichemical operations; Modelling of suspended growth systems (basic model for CSTR s); Microbial ecology; Microbial process control parameters in treatment plants (solids retention time, food/microorganism ratio, sludge volume index, influence of dissolved oxygen); Problems related to microorganisms in treatment plants (sludge bulking, foaming and frothing).

Anaerobic degradation process. Description of the anaerobic metabolic degradation and methanogenesis.
;;Arceivala,S.J., Wastewateer Treatment for Pollution Control, 2nd Edition, Tata McGraw-HIll publishing Co.Ltd., New Delhi 1998.

Metcalf and Eddy, Wastewater Engineering: Treatment, Disposal and Reuse., 3re Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Company , Singapore, 1991.

Gray,N.F., Biology of Wastewater Treatment, Oxford University Press, London, 1989.
;;
MM 683;Particle characterization, Design and analysis of mineral cerushing and grinding circuits. Plant practice and flow sheets.  Gravity concentration, Bartley Mozley, Multigravity separation, Dewatering methods. Physicochemical processes in flotation, column flotation and other advancements.  Fine particle processing, flocculation/selective flocculation.  Simulation and control of forth flotation circuits.  Automatic control of mineral processing operations.;;E.G. Kelley and D. Spotiswood, Introduction to Mineral Processing, John Wiley, 1982.
A.J. Lynch, Mineral Crushing and Grinding Circuits, Elsevier, 1977.
R.O. Burt, Gravity Concentration Technology, Elsevier, 1984.
B.A. Wills, Mineral Processing Technology, Pergamon Press, 1988.
;;
MM 685;Free electron theory, Brillouin zones, Energy Bands, Magnetic order, Hund"s rules, direcrt and superxchange interactions, Preparation and characterization of elemental, compound, polycrystalline and amorphous semiconductors.  Fabrication of electronic and optoelectronic devices, p-n, p-i-n, n-p-n and p-n-p junctions, 
FET, MOSFET, Solar cells, LED, lasers. Preparation, Characterization and properties of BaTiO, PLZT, PMN ceramics.  Relaxors, Hysteresis loops and factors influencing it. Chemical and microstructural aspects of ferrite processing.;;C.Kittel, Introduction to solid state physics, John Wiley, NY 1995.
B.G. Streetman, Solid State Electronic Devices, Prentice Hall, New Delhi, 1991.
A. Goldman, " Modern Ferrite TEchnology", Van Nostrand, New York, 1990.;;
MM 687;Theory of surface reconstructions, electronic properties of surfaces, interfaces and overlayers.,  Characterisation of surfaces by photons, electrons, ions as probes.  The effect of substarte surface structure on the overlayer properties.  Theoretical and experimental evaluation of surfaces energies, solid-liquid and solid gas interfaces-surface potentials, colloids, sedimentation, adsorption and reaction on surfaces. Damage of the surfaces by corrosion and wear.  Wear mechanisms, and cartegories of wear.  Surface modifications by diffusion, heat treatment and by coatings, surface Processing by laser, electrons and ions.
;;M. Prutton, Surface Physics, 2nd edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1983.
A.W. Adamson, Physical Chemistry or Surfaces, 3rd edition, Wiley, 1976.
K.G. Budinski, Surface Engineering for Wear Resistance, Prentice Hall, 1988.
K.H. Zum Gahr, Microstructure and Wear of materials, Elsevier, 1987.;;
ES 623;  Air Pollutants and their Effects : The air pollution system; Gases and aerosols; Atmospheric sources and sinks; Human health effects; Carcinogenic risk; Atmospheric visibility;  Ambient and emission standards; Emission factors from industrial  sources.

Atmospheric Chemistry : Chemical equilibria and kinetics; Photo-dissociation and free radical reactions; Chemistry  of precipitation, Acid rain. Aerosols : Transport behaviour - drag on a single particle; Free-molecular and continuum mechanics; Particle diffusivity; Particle migration under an external force field; Inertial behaviour - impaction to cylindrical fibers; Inertial impactors, isokinetic sampling; Convective diffusion - diffusion to cylinders; Single-fibre collection efficiency; Transition from diffudional to inertial deposition; Collision and coagulation; Gas-to-particle conversion - nucleation and condensation; Aerosol size distribution functions; Light scattering - visibility degradation; Opacity of stack emissions. Gaseous Pollutants : Vapour-liquid equilibria - two-component systems; Vapour- solid equilibria - adorsorption isotherms for typical gas-solid systems; Siffution - concentrations, velocities and mass fluxes; Fick s ;aw of diffusion; Diffusivities of gases and liquids; Interfacial mass- transfer - film and penetration theories; Mass-transfer co-efficients; Mass transfer to particles, drops and bubbles; Equilibrium stage operations - mass balances for stage processes; Equilibrium stage calculations for gas absorption.

;;Smoke, Dust and Haze: Fundamentals of Aerosol Dynamics, S K Fiendlander, Oxford University Press, New York, 2000.

Cussler, E.L., Diffusion-Mass Transfer in Fluid Systems, Cambridge University Press, New York, 1994.

McCabl;;
ES 625; Air pollution measurement : Measurement methods; Principles and instruments for particulate and gaseous pollutant measurements; Collection efficiency of crontrol devices.

Water quality monitoring : Cation/anion analysis; BOD, COD; Residual chlorine analysis; Metal analysis; Instrumental methods of pollutant analysis; Instrumental methods of pollutant analysis; Characterisation of sludge sample.

Microbiology : Microscopy; Staining and detection of microbes; Methods of enumerating microbes; Methods of enumerating microbes; Multiple tube fermentation technique; Membrane filter technique.

;;CESE Lab Manuals
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, 19th Edition, APHA/AWWA/WPCF Publishing, Washington D.C., 1995.

Ramp,H.H., and Krist,H., Laboratory Manual for the Examination of Water, Wastewater and Soil , VCH Publishers, Weinheim, 1988.

Willard,H.H., Merritt, L.L. Jr., Dean, J.A., and Settle,F.A., Jr., Instrumental Methods of Analysis, 6th Edition, C.B.S.Publishers, New Delhi, 1986.

I.S.Codes : IS 5182, IS 11255, IS 8829, IS3028.

;;
MM 689;Corrosion-oxidation characteristics of metals, alloys and composite materials at elevated temprature.  Wet corrosion.  Pourbaix, Evans diagrams.  Various forms of corrosion, including localized corrosion, their characterization and remedial measures.  Corrosion fatigue.  Corrosion inhibitors, Corrosion protection and control methods. Instrumentation and experimental techniques.;;N.D. Tomashov, Theory of Corrosion and protection of metals, Macmillan, 1967.
M.G. Fontana, Corrosion Engineering, III ed., McGraw Hill, 1985.
H.H. Uhlig Fontana, Corrosion & Corrosion Control, Wiley, 1985.;;
MM 691;Gibbs free energy composition diagrams, Analysis and synthesis of phase diagrams.  Solid-solid mucleation theory.  Interface and diffusion and kinetics of phase separation.  Order-disorder transformations.  Crystallography  of martensitic transformation.  Transformations of rapidly solidified alloys and glasses. Phase stability in advanced ceramics.  High pressure phase transformations.  Phase  transformations in Steels.;;H.I. Aaronson(ed.) Lectures on the theory of Phase transformation, The Metallurgical Society(AIME), Warrendale, Pennysylvania, 1975.
J.W. Christian, " Theory of Transformations in Metals and Alloys", Pergamon Press, 1965.
P.Haasen(Ed.), Phase Transformations in Materials, VCH Publishers Inc, New York,1991.
T.J. Gray and V.D. Frechette, "Kinetics of REactions in Ionic Crystals", Plenum Press, 1969.
A.G. Khachaturyan," Thoery of Structural Transformations in Solids", Wiley Interscience Publishers,1983.
A.M. Alper, "Phase Diagrams:Material Science and Technology", Vol6, Academic Press, 1978.;;
ES 641; Environmental regulations and policies; Environmental protection laws and acts; Environmental management systems; Strategies for management of resources, Corporate and international charters and protocols; Risk assessment; Environmental impact assessment; Industrial ecology, Pollution prevention; Wasteminimisation and sustainable development; Life cycle assessment; Environmental audits; Eco-labelling of products; Performance indicators; Environmental economics.;;Welford,R., Corporate Environmental Management, Earthscan Publications Limited, London, 1996.

Sayre,D., Inside ISO 14000 : Competitive Advantage of Environmental Management, St.Louis Press, Forids, 1996.

Graedel,T.E., aLLENBY,B.R., Industrial Ecology Englewood Cliffs : Prentice Hall, New Hersey, 1995.

Rosencranz,A., Divan,S., Noble, M.L., Environmental Law and Policy in India : Cases, Materials and Statues, Tripathi Pvt. Ltd, Bombay, 1992.
;;
EN 609; Experiments on motor, engine, pump, turbine, and heat exchanger.  Performance studies on boiler.  Determination of calorific valuemof fuels (gaseous, liquid  and solid).
Determination of moisture content of biomass. Energy analysis of recirculating airconditioning system, triple fluid vapour absorption system and compression refrigeration system.
Fabrication and characterisation of photo electrochemical cell, comparison with photovoltaic cell.;;;;
EN 641;Global energy resources, Nuclear energy in perspectives, Radio activity,Cross sections, Fission process, reaction rates, diffusion theory, elastic scattering and slowing down, criticality
calculation using one group and modified one group theory, reactivity, temperature distribution in fuel and cooland, critical heat flux, power reactors, nuclear safety.;;J.R. Lamarsh, Introduction to Nuclear Engg., 2nd Edition, Addison-Wesley, 1983.
S. Glasstone and A. Sesonske, nuclear Reactor Engg., Van Nostrand, 1981.;;
EN 643;Resource assessment, Properties of biomass and comparison with coal properties.  Thermo chemical conversion: pyrolysis devolatilasation, charring, briquetting.
Combustion;Fundamentals and applications in industries and domestic sector,like stoves, Gasification principles, types of gasifiers, Their application to thermal power and engines.
Biochemical conversion: principles, methane formation, ethanol formation.  Treatment of municipal solid wastes.  Applications of above for power generation.;;D.D. Hall and R.P. Overeed, biomass - Regenerable Energy, John Wiley and Sons
NEw York, 1987.
D.O.Hall and R.P.Overeed, Biomass - regenerable Energy, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1987.
;;
ES 643; Stochastic Processes in the Environment: Probability concepts; Conditional probability and Baye s theorem.

Environmental Data Analysis and QA/QC : Descriptive statistics; Averaging times; Sample size determination; Sampling frequency and duration; Measurement uncertainty; Accuracy and precision; Sample and dynamic blanks; Error propagation; Linear least-squares regression; Trend analysis; Non-parametric statistics.

Experiment Design and Hypothesis : Testing : Factorial design of experiments; Confidence intervals; Equality of means; T-test; Analysis of variance (ANOVA); F-test;  Significance of factor effects and their interactions.
;;Atkinson,A.C. and Donev,A.N. Optimim Experiment Design, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996.

Ott,W.R. Environmental Statistics and Data Analysis, Lewis Publishers, New Jersey, 1995.

Maxwell,S.E. and Delaney,H.D. Designing Experiments and Analysing Data, Wadsworth Publishing Company, California, 1990.

Hogg, R.V. and Ledolter,H.D.  Designiong Experiments and Analysing Data, Wadsworth Publishing Company, California, 1990.

Hogg,R.V. and Ledolter,J. Engineering Statistics, Macmillan Publishers, New York, 1989.
;;
IT 619;Understanding the operating enviornments. UNIX and NT platforms. Programming APTs.  Software development tools, LEX and YACC, Rapid application development tools, client server programming using sockets, html, CGI scripts, TCL/Tk programming.;;;;
ES645;Models of environmental management; Inventives; Context; Theories of corporate strategy and environmental policy; Environmental guidelines and charters; Auditing, Monitoring, Reporting, economics and accounting; Local economic development and environmenta; management; Role of government; Law and policies beyond environment and non-government organizations and citizens.
;;Hawken,P., Ecology and Commerce, Herper Business, New York, 1993.

Welford,R., Corporate Environmenta; Management, Earthscan Publications Ltd., London, 1996.;;
IT 621;Principles of GIS, Data Acquisition, Spatial Data Bases, Data Structures and Algorithms for GIS, Spatial Data, Manipulation and Analysis, Query Processor, Visualization, Spatial Decision Support System, Use of a Typical GIS package.  GIS System architecture, GIs design and Implementation, application.;;Star, J. and Estes, J., "Geographic Informatin Systems - An Introductin", Prentice Hall, NJ., 1990.
De Meres, M.N., "Fundamentals of Geographic Information Systems, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., NY, 1997.
Laurini, R., Thompson, D., Fundamentals of Spatial Informatino Systems, Academic Press, London, 1994.
Magwire, D.J., Goodchild, M.F. And Rhind, D.M. Ed., "Geographical Information Systems:Principles and Applications", Longman, Group, U.K.,1991.;;
ME 736; Role of Computer Graphics in CAD/CAM.
Configuration of graphic workstations.  Fundamentals of 2D graphics Menu design and Graphical User Interfaces(GUI), Customisation and Parametric programming.
Vector representation of geometric entities, Homogeneous coordinate systems, Geometric transformations.  Planar and Space curve design Analytical and Synthetic approaches, parametric and Implicit equations.  Modelling of biparametric freedom surfaces coons, Bazier, B-spline, and NURBS surface patches, Surface manipulation techniques.
Geometric modelling techniques Wireframes.  B-Rep, CSG and Hybrid modelers, Feature based, Parametric and Variational modeling.
Introduction to product data standards and data structures Data-base integration for CIM.
;;Rogers, D.F. and Adams, A. Mathematical Elements for Computer Graphics, McGraw Hill Inc., NY, 1989.
Faux, I.D. and Pratt, M.J. Computational Geometry for Design and manufacture, john Wiley & Sons, NY, 1979.
Mortenson, M.E. Geometric Modelling, john Wiley & Sons, NY, 1985.
Choi, B.K. Surface Modeling for CAD/CAM, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 1991.;;
IE 611;A quick review of calculus based probability theory: Probability space, random variables (discrete and continuous types) and their moments, independence, joint distribution, conditional probability and conditional expectation.  Convergence of sequences of random variables; almost surely, in probability and in distribution.  Strong Law of large numbers.
Introduction to stochastic process; sample paths and finite dimensional distributions, Kolmogorov"s consistency conditions.
Renewal processes, reward and cost models, cumulative processes, Poisson process and stopping times.  Regenerative processes, relation between a time average and mean of limiting distribution, Wald"s equation, renewal equation, renewal theorms.
Discrete time Markov chains, connections with renewal theory, communication classes and class properties, irreducible, and positive recurrent chains, frequencies and relative frequencies for ergodic chains, costs and reqards for ergodic chains, transient behaviour.;;G.R. Grimmett and D.R. Stizaker Probability and random processes, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1982.
W. Feller, An Introduction to probability theory and its applications, vol. 1 and 2, john Wiley, New York.
E Cinlar, introduction to stochastic processes, Prentice hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs, 1975.
S.M. Ross, Stochastic processes, John  Wiley and Sons, New York, 1983.
R.W. Wolff, Stochastic modeling and the theory of queues, Prentice Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs, 1989.
V.G. Kulkarni, modeluing and Analysis of stochastic systems, Chapman and 
Hall, ondon, 1995.
;;
CE 611; Review of Concepts: Basic concepts of structural analysis; Basis for principle of virtual work; Principle of virtual forces - standard and matrix formulation; Force method for analysing skeletal structure; Principles of virtual displacements -  standard and matrix formulation; Displacement method for analysing skeletal structures; Extension of displacement method to the
generalised stiffness method; Basic concepts associated with computer implementation of stiffness method.
One dimensional beam element: Basis for cross-sectional level formulation of flexibility and stiffness; Gauss quadrature numerical integration scheme; Flexibility approach for determining element stiffness; Stiffness approach for determining element stiffness; Special consideration of shear effects in stiffness approach; Consideration of torsional effects for thin walled member - incl. torsion bending; special considerations for finite joints(both rigid and flexible); Consideration of local load(incl. temp.)effects; Formulation of geometric stiffness due to axial force; Linearised buckling analysis.
Simplifications to reduce computational effort in analysis: Substructure analysis(static condensation); Symmetry consideration in structures.
;;M.B. Kanchi, " Matrix Structural Analysis" Gere Weaver, " Matrix Structural Analysis"
Pandit Gupte, S.A. by Matrix Approach, T.M., 1994.;;
CE 625; Loads and structural forms of different types of offshore structures; Elements of single d.o.f. system subjected to free and forced vibrations; Analysis for transient and steady state force; Equivalent damping for nonlinear systems; Dynamics of multi d.o.f. systems, Eigen values and vectors; Iterative and transformation methods; Mode superposition, Fourier series mand spectral method of response of single d.o.f. systems; Vibration of bars, beams and cones with reference to soil as half space; Behaviour of concrete gravity platform as a rigid body on soil as a continuum; Short and long term statistics of wind; static wind load; effect of size, shape and frequency; Aerodynamic admittance function and gust factor, spectral response due to wind for various types of structures; Wave loads by Morison"s equation; Static and dynamic analysis of fixed equation; Static and dynamic analysis of fixed structures; Use of approximate methods.;;Brebbia C.A. and Walker, " Dynamic Analysis of offshore structures", Newness butterworth, London, 1978.
Sarpakaya T. and Isaacson M., " Mechanics of Wave Forces on Offshore Structures", Van Nostrand Rainhold, New
York, 1981.
Hallam M.G., Heaf N.J. and Wootton, L.R., "Dynamics of Marine Structures", CIRIA Publicartions, Underwater Engg., Group, London, 1978.
Graff W.J., "Introduction to Offshore Structures", Gulf Publishing Co., Houston, Texas, 1981.
Clough R.W. and Penzien J., "Dynamics of Structures", IInd Edition, McGraw hill, 1992.
Simiu E. and Scanlan R.H., " wind effectes on Structures", Wiley,New York, 1978.
Codes of Practices(latest versions) such as API  R-2A, bureau Veritas etc.
;;
MA 101;    Evaluation of limits of functions.  Continuous functions.  Differentiation of sum, difference, product and quotient of funtions. Chain rule. Maxima and Minima.  Partial differentiation. Integration by substitution and by parts, application to evaluation of areas and volumes.  Differential equations of first order.
Linear differential equations with constant co-efficients.;;N.S. Piskunov, Differential and Integral Calculus, Vol. I and II, Mir Publishers, Moscow, 1979.
G.B. Thomas and R.L. Finney, Calculus and Analytic Geometry, 9th ed., ISE reprint, Addison-Wesley, 1998.
;;
MA 411;   Events, sigma-fields, specifying probabilities on sigma-fields, extension theorem(without proof), independence of classes of events, random variables.
Distribution functions, discrete, continuous and mixed.
Moments - moment generating functions, Characteristic functions.
Random vectors and joint distributions, conditional distribution, conditional expectation.
Convergence of random variables  - the four modes of convergence and their relationships.  Laws of large numbers and Central Limits Theorm.;;P. Billingsley, Probability and Measure, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 1986.
K.L. Chung, Elementary Probability Theory with Stochastics Processes, 3rd Ed., Narosa Pub. Co., 1979.
J.Pitman, Probability, Narosa Pub. Co., 1993.
M. Woodroofe, Probability with Application, McGraw-Hill, NY, 1975.;;
BT 415;General principles: buffers; electroanalytical methods: potentiometric and conductometric; photometry; chromatographic methods of separation: gel permeation, ion exchange, reverse-phase and affinity chromatography HPLC and FPLC; centrifugation; radiotracer techniques; gel electrophoresis techniques: molecular weight determination, electroblotting and electroelution, capillary electroblotting and electroelution, capillary electrophoresis API-electrospray and MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry; analysis of carbohydrates, lipids, proteins and nucleic acids; enzyme and cell immobilization techniques; immunochemical methods of analysis; biosensors and diagnostics.;;D.Holme and H.Peck; Analytical Biochemistry. Longman, 1983.

R.GCopper; The Tools of Biochemistry. Wiley Intersciences, 1977.

R.Scopes; Protein Purification: Principles and Practices.Springer Verlag, 1982.

Selected readings from Methods in Enzymology, Academic Press.
;;
MA 417;   Review of solution methods for first order as well as second order equations, Power series methods with properties of Bessel functions and Legendre polynomials.
Existance and uniqueness of Initial Value problems; Picards and Peanos theorems, Gronwall"s inequality, continuation of solutions and maximal interval of existance, continuous dependence.

Higher order linear equations and linear systems; fundamendal solutions, Wronskian, variation of constants, matrix exponential solution behaviour of solutions.

Two dimensional Autonomous Systems and Phase Space Analysis: Critical points, proper and improper nodes, spiral points, and saddle points. 

Asymptotic Behavior: Stability ( linearized stability and Lyapunov methods.)

Boundary Value Problems for second order equations: Green"s function, Sturm comparison theorms and oscillations, eigenvalue problems.
;;R.P. Agarwal and R. Gupta, Essentials of Ordinary Differential Equations, Tata McGraw-Hill Pub. Co., New Delhi, 1991.
M. Braun, Differential Equations and their Applications, 4th Edition, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1993.
E.A. Coddington and N. Levinson, Theory of Ordinary Differential Equations, Tata McGraw-Hill Publ. Co., New Delhi, 1990.
L. Perko, Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems, 2nd Edition, Texts in Applied Mathematics, Vol.7, Springer Verlag, New York, 1998.
M. Rama Mohana Rao, Ordinary Differential Equations: Theory and Applications. Affiliated East-West Press Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 1980.
A. Sanchez, Ordinary Differential Equations and Stability Theory: An Introduction, Dover Pub. Co., New York, 1968.
;;
BT 419;Biosphere: concept and properties of a living cell; chemical basis of life ; cell structure: plant, animal and microbial cells; organelle fractionation techniques; composition of living matter: biomolecules; properties of water; Biomolecular hierarchy; macromolecules and molecular assemblies; structure-function, relationship smong major classes of biomolecules; amino acids and peptides; covalent structure of proteins and its elucidation; primary, secondary tertiary and higher order structures with respective examples; structure-function relationship analysis of ribonuclease, chymotrypain; concept of active site of an enzyme; evolution of protein structure and function; sugars: mono- di- and poly-saccharides: glocoproteins; glycolysis and TCA cycle: lipids: classification: lipoproteins and biological membranes: nucleic acids: nucleosides, nucleotides; fractionation of nucleic acids; DNA structure; central dogma: concepts of transcription and translation ;;L.Lehninger; Principles of Biochemistry. C.B.S. Publishers, 1987.

Voet and J.G.Voet; Biochemistry, Wiley New York, 1990.

;;
MA 415;  Asymptotic Methods: asymptotic expansions, methods of strained co-ordinates and matched asymptotic expansions.
Fourier Methods with Applications: Generalised functions, eigenfunctioon expansion and Green"s functions, Fourier transform, Convolution, Parseval"s Theorm, fundamental solutions, and applications to heat, Laplace and wave equations.
Variational Methods: minimum of quadratic functional, Lax-milgram theorm and applications to boundary value theorms.
Linear Integral Equations: Fredholm and Volterra Integral Equations, Hilbert-Schmidt theory,  iterative methods and Neumann series.;MA 436;R.K. Bose and M.C. Joshi, Methods of Mathematical Physics, Tata-McGraw-Hill Pub. Co. Ltd., NEw Delhi, 1984.
R. Courant and D. hilbert, Methods of mathematical Physics, Vol 1, Wiley Eastern Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 1975.
R. Dautray and J.L. Lions, Mathematical Analysis and Numeraical Methods for Science and Technology, Vol 5., Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1992.
J. Kovorkian and J.D. Cole, Perturbation Methods in Appliced Mathematics, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1985.
S.G. Mikhlin, Variational MEthods in Mathmatical Physics, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1964.
A. Mayfeh, Perturbation Methods, Wiley Publ., New York, 1973.
J.N. Reddy, Applied Functional Analysis and Variational Methods, McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1987.
E. Zauderer, Partial Differential Equations in Applied Mathematics, 2nd edition, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1989.;;
BT 420;Structure-reactivity correlations. Frontier orbitals and their interactions. Acid-Base equilibria. Extended pKa scale. Electrophilic and nucleophilic reaction mechanisms. Solvents and solvent effects. Hammond postulate and analysis of energy profile diagrams. LFER approach. Electronic and steric effects in rates and iquilibria. Principles of chemical and enzymatic catalysis. Notion of transition state stabilization. General acid-base  catalysis. Nucleophilic catalysis. Electrophilic and electrostatic catalysis. Effects of desolvation, approximation and preassociation. Multiple catalysis. Notion of perfect enzymes. Mechanism and catalysis of following typical reactions. C-C bond formation, glocosyltransfer, acyl exchange, phosphoryl exchange, hydride transfer, one carbon transfer.
;;Mechanism in Protein Chemistry. Jack Kite, Garland publishers, 1995.

Physical Basis of Organic Chemistry of Maskill, Howard, Oxford Univ. Press, 1995.
      Bio-Organic Chemistry of Enzyme Catalysis.

M.L.Bender, R.J.Bergersonand M.Komiyana, Wily, 1984.

Mechanisms and Theory in Organic Chemistry. T.H.Lowry and K.S.Richardson, Harper Row 1976.;;
MA 525;Review of stability of linear systems, FLow defined by  nonlinear systems of ODEs, Linearizatin and stable manifold theorm. Hartman Grobman theorm. Stability and Lyanpunov functions.  Planar flows: saddle point, nodes, foci, centers and nonhyperbolic critical points.  Gradient and Hamiltonian systems.  Limits sets and attractors.  Poincare may, Poincare BEnedixson theory and Poincare index.;MA 417;P. Hartman, Ordinary Differential Equations, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 1964.
M.W. Hirsch and S. Smale, Differential Equations, Dynamical Systems and Linear Algebra, Academic Press, NY, 1974.
L. Perko, Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems, Springer Verlag, Ny, 1991.
S. Wiggins, introduction to applied Nonlinear Dynamical Systems and Chaos, TAM vol2., Springer-verlag, NY, 1990.;;
MA 527;Review of density theorms: the theorms of Korovkin, fejer and Stone-Weierstrass.
The classical Chebyshev theory, discretization and dirscrete best approximation, the second algorithm of REmes. 
Degree of approximation, moduli of continuity and K-functionals, direct and converse theorms.
Interpolation, Legrange form, extended Haar subspaces and Hermite interpolation, Hermite Fejer interpolation, Hermite-Birkhoff interpolation. Piecewise polynomial interpolation.;MA 403;R. Devore. and G.G. Lorentz, Constructive Approximatin, Springer-verlag, Berlin, 1993.
G.G. Lorentz, Approximation of functins, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, NY, 1966.
H.N. Mhaskar and D.V. PAi, Fundamentals of Approximation theory, Narosa Publishing House, ND, 2000.;;
MA 529;Finite difference: grids, derivation of difference equations. Elliptic equations: Discrete maximum principle and stability, residual correction methods(Jacobi, Gauss-Seidel and SOR methods), LOD and ADI methods.  Finite difference Schemes for initial and boundary value problems: Stability(matrix method, von-Neumann and energy methods), LAx-Richtmyer equivalence theorm.  Parabolic equatioons: explicit and implicit methods (Backward Euler and Crank-Nicolson schemes) with stability and convergence, ADI methods.  Linear scalar conservation law: upwind, Lax-Wendroff and Lax-Friedrich schems and CFL condition.
Lab component: Exposure to MATLAB and computational experimeents based on the algorithms discussed in the course.
;MA 436;A. R> Mitchell and S.D.F. Griffiths, The finite Difference Methods in partial differential Equations, Wiley & sons, 1980.
R.D. Richtmyer and K.W. Morton, Difference Methods for Initial Value Problems, Wiley Interscience, NY, 1969.
G.D. Smith, Numerical solutions of partial Differential Equations, 3rd edition, clarendon press, Oxford,1985.
J.C. Strikwerda, Finite Difference Schemes and Partial Differential Equations, Wadsworth and Brooks/Cole Advanced Books and Software, Pacific Grove, California, 1989.
J.W. Thomas, Numerical Partial Differential Equations: Finite Difference Methods, Texts in Applied AMthematics, Vol22, Springer Verlag, NY, 1999.
J.W. Thomas, Numerical Partial differential Equations: Conservation laws and Elliptic equations, Texts in Applied Mathematics Vol 33., Springer Verlag, NY, 1999.;;
MA 559;Normed linear spaces. Continuity of linear maps.  Hahn-Banach theorm in extension.  Banach spaces. Dual spaces.  Reflexivity(definiton and simple examples).
The uniform boundedness principle and its applicatioons. The closed graph theorm, the open mapping theorm and their applications. Spectrum of a bounded operator.  Compact operators and their spectra. Fredholm alternatives.
Inner product spaces, hilbert spaces, Orthonormal basis. Projection theorm and the Riesz representation theorm.  Reflexivity of Hilbert spaces.;MA 403, MA 404;J.B. Conway, A course in Functional Analysis, SPringer-Verlag, Berlin, 1985.
G. Goffman and G. Pedrick, First course in functional analysis, Prentice-Hall, 1974.
E. Kreyszig, Introductory Functional Analysis with applications, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 1978.
B.V. Limaye, Functional Analysis, 2nd ed., New Age International, New Delhi, 1996.
A. Taylor and D. Lay, Introduction to functional analysis, Wiley, Ny, 1980.;;
MA 561;Semi-algebra, Algebra, Sigma-algebra, Monotone class, Monotone class theorm, Measure spaces. Outline of extension of measures from algebras to the generated sigma-algebras, Measurable sets.
MEasurable functions and their properties, outline of integration and convergence theorms. Introduction to L-spaces, Riesz-fischer theorm.
Product measure spaces, Fubini"s theorm. Absolute continuity to measures,Random Nikodym theorm.;MA 403;P.R. Halmos, Measure Theory, Graduate Text in Mathematics, Springer-Verlag, 1979.
I.K. Rana, An Introduction to Measure and Integration, Narosa Publishing House, ND, 1997.
H.L. royden, Real Analysis, 2nd Ed., Macmillan, 1968.;;
MA 569;Affine varieties, parametrization, ideals, orderings on monomials, Dickson"s Lemma, Groebner bases, hilbert Basis Theorm, Buchberger"s algorithm, ideal membership, geometry of elimination, singular points, resultants and extension theorm, hilbert"s Nullstellensatz, ideal variety correspondance, basic computation among ideals via Groebner bases, Coordinate ring of an affine variety and algorithmic computations in it, solving equations via eigenvalues, projective varieties, projective nullstellensatz, computation of projective nullstellensatz, computation of projective closure, hilbert function and fimension of a variety and their computation. Applications to graph colouring and integer programming.
Lab. Component: Implementation of algorithms developed in this course using Macaylay programming language.;MA 402;W.W. Adams and P. Laustaunau, An introduction to Groebner Bases, American Mathematical Society, 1994.
D. Cox, J. Little and D. O"Shea. Ideals, Varieties and Algorithms, 2nd Editions, Springer-Verlag, 1996.
D. Cox, J. Little and D. O"Shea, Using Algebraic Geometry, Springer-Verlag, 1998.;;
BT 421;Introduction to the microbial kingdom - An overview. Morphological details of prodaryotic and eukaryotic microbes. eg. bacteria, fungi, yeasts, protists, stroptomycetes. Methods in microscopy and staining procedures sterilization techniques, kinetics of sterilization, control of microbes by physical and chemical means. Isolation and enrichment of organisms, pure culture techniques and methods for culture preservation, Microbial classification - methods with emphasis on representative groups like bacteria, fungi, actinomycetes etc. Serotyping,rDNA and RFLP analysis. Virises (bacterial, plant and animal) - structure, classification, modes of replication and growth. Microbia growth - Kinetics of growth, methods of growth measurement. Batch and continuous cultivation techniques, chemostat and turnidostat techniques. Microbial pthogenicity and mechanism, host-microbe interactions, antibiotics and mechanism of antibiotic resistance. Genome organization. Representative examples of microbes in industry, bioconversions, agriculture and medicine. ;;Stanier R.T., Igraham J.HL., Wheelis M.L. and Painter, P.R., gENERAL mICROBIOLOG; mECMILLIAN, 5TH. eDITION, 1987.

PelczerjR. M.J.; Chan E.C.S. and Kreig N.R. Microbiology, McGraw Hill, Fifth Edition, 1986.

Glazer A.N. and Nikido H Microbial Biotechnology and  Fundamentals of Applied Microbiology, Freeman, 1995.

;;
MA 581;Differentiable Manifolds in Rn: Review of inverse and implicit function theorms, tangent spaces and tangent maps; immersions, submersions and embeddings.
Regular Values: Regular and Critical values; reguler inverse image theorm; Sard"s theorm; Morse Lemma.
Transeversality: Orientations of manifolds; oriented and mod2 intersection numbers; degree of maps. Application to fundamental theorm of Algebra.
Lefschetz theory of vector fields and flows: Poincase-Hopf index theorm; Gauss-Bonnet theorm.
Abstract manifolds: Examples such as real and complex projective spaces and Grassmannian varieties; Whitney embedding theorms.;MA 404;A.A. Dubovin, A.T. Fomenko, S.P. Novikov, Modern Geometry Methods and applications-II, the Geometry and Topology of manifolds, Springer-Verlag GTM 104, 1985.
V. Guillemin and A pollack, Differential Topology Prentice-Hall Inc., Englewood cliffs, New Jersey, 1974.
J. Milnor, Topology from the differentia View Point, University Press of Vriginia, Charlottsville, 1990.;;
MA 583;Description of continuous and kinematics. Forces, deformations, constitutive equations. Theory of motions-steady and unsteady motions. Spin vectors and tensors. Conservation laws- physical models and applications.;;Y. C. Fung, A first Course in Continum Mechanics, Prentice Hall Inc., New York, 1977.
M. E. Gurtin, An introduction to Continuum MEchanics, Academic Press, NY, 1981.
S. Hunter, Mechanics of Continuum Media, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 1983.;;
CS 101;Functional organisation of computers, algorithms, basic progamming concepts, FOR-TRAN language programming. Program testing and debugging. Modular programming subroutines: Selected examples from Numerical Analysis, Game playing, sorting/searching methods, etc.;;N.N. Biswas, FORTRAN IV Computer Programming, Radiant Books, 1979.
K.D> Sharma, Programming in Fortran IV, Affiliated EAST WEST, 1976.;;
CS 387;Use of database systems supporting interactive SQL and $GLs, spread-sheets, client-server GUI development using packages like Power Builder or Gupta SQL, and using the web.  Design of applications and user interfaces using these systems.;;;;
CS 317;Nature of business systems and Data processing. 
Data Models, ER diagrams and Data Flow Diagrams. Introduction to Relational Theory, Normalisation.
SQL-92 and host language interfaces. Storage structures. Indexing and hashing techniques. Introduction to query processing and transactions.
Web based information systems. Information retrieval Systems.;;Abraham Silberschatz, Henry f. Korth and S. Sudarshan, Database system concepts 3rd ed., McGraw Hill, 1997.
James A. Senn, Analysis and Design of Information Systems, McGraw Hill, 1990.
Ramez Elmasri and Shamkant Navathe, Fundamentals of Database systems, 2nd Ed., Benjamin Cummings, 1994.
;;
BT 455;Introduction to computers: hardware software; types of computers; concept of files and directories; OS and interfaces; commonly used as commands; concept of login and logout; file ownership; networking fundamentals: client-server ; LAN, WAN;  ftp, telner, rlogin; internet, WWW. html; scientific databases: PDB, CCDB, NDB; Mediline; programming in a high-level language: algorithms, pseudocodes; examples from chemistry, biology and numerical analysis.
;;V.C.Hamacher, Z.G.Vranesic and S.G.Zaky; Computer Organization. McGraw-Hill Co., 1996.

V.Rajaraman; Fundamentals of Computers. Prentice-Hall India Private limited, 1996.

R.White; How Computers Work. BPB Publications, 1996.
;;
BT 515; Overview of metabolism; concept of flow of matter and energy; thermodynamics of coupled systems and non-equilibrium reactions; biological energy currencies : high energy bond, reducing power and inter conversions of energh forms; carbon, nitrogen cycles in biosphere; classification of liging system based on carbon and energy requirements; methods to study metabolism; carbonhydrate and lipid catabolism; glycolysis; TCA cycle; fatty acid oxidation, other metabolic routes of carbon; oxidative phosphorylation; biosynthesis of carbohydrates and lipids photosynthesis; photosynthetic electron transport; Calvin cycle and other avenues of harvesting light energy; gluconeogenesis; Cori cycle; glycogen metabolism; biogenesis of fatty acids and sterols; nitrogen metabolism  : sources of organic nitrogen; flow of nitrogen into biosysthesis and catabolism of amino acids; central metabolism of nucleotides; urea cycle and excreation of nitrogen; integration of metabolism and concepts of metabolic regulation.;;R. S. Ocks, R. W. Hanson and J. Halls; Metabolic Regulation. Elsevier, 1985.
P. W. Atkins; Physical Chemistry. ELBS, 1981.
A. G. Marshall; Biophysical Chemistry, 1978.
J. G. Morris; A Biologist"s Physical Chemistry, 1974.
Principles of Cell Energetics, Biotol Series, Butterworth - Heinemann, 1993.
Energy sources of Cells, Biotol Series, Buttorworth - Heinemann, 1993.;;
MG 771; What is Organizational Behaviour, Perception, Personality, Attitudes and Attitude Change, Motivation Concepts and Applications, Work and Careers, Stress at Work, Group Behaviour and Group Decision Making, Teams at Work, Communication, Managing helping relationships, Conflict and Negotiation in Organizations, Influence, Power and Politics in Organizations, Leadership in Organizations.
;;Greenberg, Jerald and Baron, Robert A (1995) Behaviour in Organizations (5th Edition) New delhi, Prentice - Hall.
Robbins, Stephen P. (1996) Organizational Behaviour: Concepts, Controversies. Applications (7th Edition) New York, McGraw Hill.
Luthans, Fred (1995) Organizational Behaviour (7th Edition) New York: McGraw-Hill.
;;
MG 773; Introduction to Organization Theory, Organizational Effectiveness, Dimensions for Understanding Organizations - Structure, Age & Size, Technology, Culture, Environment, Strategy, Power & Politics in Organizations, Organizational Decision Making, Information Processing and Organizational Design, Organizational Change and Adaptation, Network Organizations, Service Organizations and Non-Profit Organizations, Missionary Organizations, Small Enterprises.
;;Mintzberg, H. (1989). Mintzberg on Management. New York. The Free Press.
Robbins, S.P. (1990). Organization Theory, 3rd Ed., Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Shukla, Madhukar (1996) Understanding Organizations New Delhi: Prentice Hall.
;;
MG 667; Macroeconomics. Concepts of National Income, Product and Money Supply. Brief Overview of the Indian Economy. Planning and Economic Development. Role of Agricultural and Industrial Sectors. Regulatory, Legislative, Fiscal, Monetary and Promotional Policies of the Government and Post-Liberalisation Changes. International Trends and their Impacts. Industry Structure and Industry Policy Analysis.
;;Dutt and Sundaram, Indian Economy, S. Chand & Co., 1991. 
Bimal Jalan, India"s Economic Policy, Viking, 1996.
S. Chakravarty, Development Planning, Oxford University Press, 1987. 
S. Tarlok Singh, India"s Development experience, St. Martin"s Press 1974.
;;
MG 665;The Firm and the Consumer as Economic Entities; Concepts of Utility and Demand; Elasticity of Demand; Factor Inputs, Production and Supply. Analysis of Market Equilibrium, Prices and Outputs. Demand and Cost Estimation, Analysis and Forecasting. Concepts of Welfare and Consumer"s Surplus. Investment Analysis and Cost-Benefit Analysis. Opportunity Cost and Discounting.
;;;;
MG 669; Understanding Technology; Representations of Technology; Technology and Economic Growth. Patterns of Technological Change; Drivers for Innovation. Determinants of Technological Change; Market Dynamics and Structure; Government Intervention and the Role of Technology Policy; International Protocols, Treaties and Standards. Evolution of Technology Policy and Infrastructure across Nations. Role of International Agencies. Linkages between Technology, Development and Competition.

;;P. Lowe, The Management of Technology, Champman & Hall, 1995.
F. Betz: Managing technology, Prentice Hall of India, 1987.
D. Sahal, Patterns of technological innovation, Addison Wesley, New York, 1981.
R. Nelson, National Innovation Systems, Oxford University Press, 1993.
D. F. Simon, The emerging technological trajectory of the Pacific Rim, East Gate Book, M.E. Shoope Inc., 1995.
;;
MG 671; Role of Production Operations in the Enterprise. Systems Concept and Types of Production Operations Systems, Choice of PO Systems and Product Process Matrix. Product, Process and Factory Life Cycles, Facilities Planning: Capacity Planning, Location and Layout Group Technology for Cellular Manufacturing. Management of Productivity: Work Analysis and Measurement, Work System Design and Improvement, Incentives and Reward Schemes, Learning and Experience Curves, Design and Implementation of Productions/Operations Systems, Applications to Service Operations Management.
;;E. S. Buffa and R. Sarin, Production and Operations Management, 8th edition, Wiley 1994.
E. E. Adams & R. J. Ebert, Production and Operatons Management, PHI, 5th edition, 1994.
;;
BT 517;Natural and acquired immunity: Phagocytosis,inflammatory responses, complement system. Hematopoiesis and lymphoid system. Primary and secondary lymphoid organs Elements of the immune system: T and B lymphocytes, Antigen presenting cells and subsets of T cells. Antistructure (isotype, allotype and idiotype), function and diversity. Monoclonal antibodies: T cell and B cell hybridomas. Immunological Techniques: precipitation, agglutination, RIA,ELISA and fluorescence activated cell sorter. Major Histocompatibility antigens: structure, function and polymorphismsm. Antigen presentation. T cell and B cell receptore and accessory molecules.Mechanisms of lymphocyte activation. Regulation of immune responses: Primary and secondary responses, idlotypic network, Cytotoxic T cell Responses, mixed lymphocyte reactions. Lymphokines. Tolerance.
;;Janes Kuby; Immunology 2nd edition. W.H.Freeman and Company New York, 1994.

I.M.Roit; Essential Immunology. Blackwell Scientific publication, 1988.

W.E.Paul; Fundamental Immunology. Raven Press, 1998.;;
MG 681; International Balance of Payments & Exchange Rates. Exchange Rate Determination. Structure of the Foreign Exchange Market. Purchasing Power & Interest Parity. Exchange Rate Forecasting. Foreign Exchange Risk Management. International Cash Management. Understanding Swaps.Investing in Foreign Operations. International Capital Budgeting. Managing Country/Political Risk. Tapping International Equity and Bond Markets. International Portfolio Diversification. Designing International Financial Structure. Mechanics of Raising Foreign Borrowings. Multinational Banking. Export-Import Finance. Indian institutional and legal frame work.
;;D. M. Levi, International Finance : The Markets and Financial Management of Multinational Business, McGraw Hill Book Company, Singapore, 1996. 
S. C. Alan, Multinational Financial Management, Prentice Hall of India Pvt. ltd. (4th Edition, 1996). 
P. G. Apte, International Financial Management, Tata McGraw Hill, 1996. 
P. R. Joshi, Global Capital Markets: Shopping for Finance, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd. New Delhi, 1996. 
R. Rodriguez and E Carter, International Financial Management, Prentice Hall of India Private Ltd. Delhi, 1981.
;;
BT 553;Isolation of chromosomal DNA, poly A+RNA; restruction endonuclease digestion; analysis on agarose gel electrophoresis; DNA cloning; plasmid isolation; cololy hybridisation; titration of M13; RF transformation; isolation of single strand temple; DNA sequencing; Southern blotting: Northern Blotting. ;;T.Maniatis, E.F.Fritsch, J.Sambrook; Molecular cloning a laboratory manual. Cold spring harbor laboratory press, 1989.

G.J.Boulnois; Gene cloning and analysis: A loboratory guide. Blackwell scientific publications, 1987.
   ;;
MG 657; Process of Technology Transfer: Mechanisms for Technology Transfer, Outsourcing, Licensing, Product Consortia, and Joint Ventures. Analytical and Empirical Models of Technology Transfer. Technology Sourcing: In-house R & D, Other Firms, Laboratories, Academia. Technology Pricing Models. Managing Successful Technology Transfer; Organisational Capabilities, Technology Assimilation and Diffusion. Policy Environment for Technology Transfer. Case Studies in Technology Transfer. Global Technology Transfer and Technology Flows. Role of Multinationals. Technology Transfer to LDCs and Niches. Technology Learning through Technology Transfer. Regulatory and Promotional Framework. Developing TT Agreements.
;;F. Betz, Managing Technology : Competing Through New Ventures, Innovation & Corporate Research, PHI, 1987.
K. S. V. Menon, Technology Transfer: Concept, Modalities & Case Studies, Goldline, Delhi 1991.
F. R. Bradbury, Technology Transfer practices of International Firms, Sijthoff, Netherlands, 1978.
T. M. Chaturvedi, Transfer of Technology among Developing countries, Geetanjali Publishing House, New Delhi, 1982.
F. Williams and D. V. Gibson, Technology Transfer : a Communication Perspective, Sage publishers, 1990.
N. F. Sullivan, Technology Transfer; Making the most of your Intellectual Property, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995.
;;
MG 659; The Imperative of WCM, Evolution of WCM. Basis Building Blocks of WCM. Benchmarking for WCM. Advanced Manufacturing Technology (AMT) for WCM - Definition, Evaluation and their Competitive Potential. AMTs in Use - CAD/CAM, Computer Aided Process Planning (CAPP). Flexible Manufacturing Systems (FMS), Computer Integrated Manufacturing (CIM). Enabling Systems for World Class Manufacturing (WCM), Just in Time (JIT) Systems. Group Technology (GT), Design Manufacturing Integration (DMI), Learning Organisation, Integrative Planning Systems (MRPII/ERP), Accounting Systems (ABC), Benefits and Economic Justification of WCMs. Implementations of WCMs. Barriers to Implementation. Strategic Implications of WCM. Role of WCM in Competitive Strategy. Choice and Supplier Selection.
;;M. P. Groover, Automation, Production Systems and Computer Integrated Manufacturing, PHI, 1995.
M. G. Korgoanker, Just in Time Manufacturing, Macmillan India, 1982.
R. J. Schonberger, World Class Manufacturing, The Free Press, 1986.
R. J. Schonberger, World Class Manufacturing case book, Free Press, 1987.
;;
BT 557;Introduction; Databases - mapping, sequence, structure, non-redundant; Sequence alignment pairwise and multiple; phylogenetics; Structure prediction methods - homology, threading, abinitio; Sequence analysis - class and secondary structure prediction; motifs - PROSITE; detecting functional sites in DNA; ORFinder; Computer science perspective - pattern recognition, hidden Markov models; neural networks.;;Bioinformatics.(A.D.Baxevanis & B.F.F.Ouellette, eds.) Wiley Interscience, 1998.

Computational methods in molecular biology. (S.L.Salzberg, D.B.Searls, S.Kasif eds.) Elsevier, 1998.

Computer methods for macromolecular sequence analysis. R.F.Doolittle, Academic Press, 1996.

Guide to human genome computing. M. Bishop. Academic Press, 1998.

Genetics Databases. M.J.Bishop. Academic Press, 1999.

;;
SI 411;    Introduction to Unix: Introduction to C programming language, Syntax, Data types, Pointers, Functions, Scope rules, bindings, parameters transmission mechanism, storage management.;;B. Kernighan, R. Pike, The Unix Programming Enviornment, Prentice Hall India, 1995.

B. Kernighan, D. Ritchie, The C Programming Language, Prentice Hall India, 1996.;;
SI 531;Mathematical preliminaries :  Assymptotic notation.  Advanced, Data structures : Hash tables, Binomial Heaps, Disjoint sets.
Greedy Algorithms : Huffman coding, Minimum spanning Tree construction, Dijkstra"s shortest path construction.  Dynamic programming Algorithms : Matrix - chain multiplication, All pairs shortest path problems, Minimum weight triangulation of convex polygons.  Divide and conquer : Linear time selection, Educlidean closest pair problem, Strassen"s matrix multiplication algorithm.
Backtracking and Branch and Bound methods : Graph colouring, Integer programming, Approximation algorithms : Vertex cover, Euclidean travelling salesman problem, Set cover problem.;;T. Cormen, C. Leiserson, and R. Rivest, Introduction to Algorithms, MIT Press and McGraw Hill BOok Company, 1991.
U. Manber, Introduction to Algorithms : A Creative Approach, Addison-Wealey, 1989.;;
SI 533;Review of 2nd order PDEs : Classification, separation of variaqbles and fourier transform techniques.
Automatic mesh generation techniques : Structure mesh ( transfinite interpolation), unstructured grids ( triangulation for polygonal and non - polygonal domains).
Finite difference Methods : Elliptic equations ( SOR and conjugate gradient methods, ADI schemes), parabolic equations ( explicit, back - ward Euler and Crank -  Nicolson method, LOD), hyperbolic equations ( Law - Wendroff scheme, Leapfrod method, CFL conditions), Stability, consistency and convergence results.
Lab Component : Implementation of Algorithms developed in this course and exposure to software packages : ODEPACK and MATLAB.;;Gene H. Golub and James M. Ortega, Scientific Computing and Differential Equations : An Introduction to Numerical Methods, Academic Press, 1992.
P. Knupp and S. Steinberg, Fundamentals of Grid Generation, CRC Press Inc., Boca Raton, 1994.
A. R. Mitchell and D. F. Griffiths, The finite Difference Methods in Partial Differential Equations, Wiley, 1980.
G. D. Smith, Numerical Solutions of Partial Differential Equations, Oxford Press, 1985.
J. C. Stickwards, Finite Difference Schemes and PDEs, Chapman and Hall, 1989.
J. F. Thompson, Z. U., A. Waarsi and C. W. MAstin, Numerical Grid Generations - Foundations and Applications, North Holland, 1985.
Erich Zauderer, Partial Differential Equations of Applied Mathematics, 2nd ed., Wiley, 1989.;;
SI 535; Two - way contingency tables : Table structure for two dimensions.  Ways of comparing proportions. Measures of associations. Sampling distributions. Goodness - of - fit tests, testing of independence. Exact and large sample interference.
Models of binary response variable. Logistic regression. Logistic models for categorial data.  Probit and extreme value models. Log - linear models for two and three dimensions.  fitting of logit and log -  linear models. Log - linear and logit models for ordinary variables.
Regression : Simple, multiple, non - linear regression, likelihood ratio test, confidence intervals and hypotheses tests, tests for distributional assumptions Collinearity, outliers, analysis of residuals. Model building, Principal component and ridge regression.
Lab component : Relevant real life problems to be done using statistical Software Packages such as SAS etc.
  ;;A. Agresti, Analysis of Categorial Data, Wiley, 1990.
A. Agresti, An introduction to Categorial Data Analysis, Wiley, NY, 1996.
E. B. Anderson, The statistical Analysis of Categorial Data, Springer - Verlag, 1990.
R. F. Gunst and R. L. Mason, Regression Analysis and its applications - A Data Oriented Approach, Marcel Dekkar, 1980.
T. J. Santner and D. Duffy, The Statistical Analysis of Discrete Data, Springer - Verlag, 1989.
A. A. Sen and M. Srivastava, regression Analysis - Theory, Methods and  Applications, Springer - Verlag, 1990.;;
SI 410; Concepts in programming Languages Paradigms and the issues such as storage management, formal translation models ( BNF forms and grammers), abstraction such as subprogramm (parameter passing mechanics, scopes, bindings etc.), inheritance and polymorphism etc.
Illustration of these concepts through the study of C++ programming language.;;S. Lippman, " C++ Primer ", Addison  -  Wesley Publishing Company, 1995.
T. W. Pratt and Zelkowitz, Programming Languages : Design and Implementation, Prentice Hall India, 1996.;;
HS 001;Listening comprehension. Rapid reading and intensive reading skills. Oral skills with emphasis on conversational practice. Writing skills through guided composition - paragraphs and simple essays. Remedial grammer - word order, clause structure, and sentence types, articles, tenses, active and passive forms, and prepositions. Vocabulary development.
Reading materials to be selected by the teachers.;;;;
HS 101; Basic economic problems.  resource constraints and Welfare maximizations. Nature of Economics : Positive and normative economics; Micro and macroeconomics, Basic concepts in economics. The role of the State in economic activity; market and government failures; New Economic Policy in India.
Theory of utility and consumer"s choice. Theories of demand, supply and market equilibrium. Theories of firm, production and costs.  Market structures. Perfect and imperfect competition, oligopoly, monopoly.
An overview of macroeconomics, measurement and determination of national income. Consumption, savings, and investments. Commercial and central banking.  Relationship between money, output and prices.  Inflation - causes, consequences and remedies. International trade, foreign exchange and balace payments, stabilization policies : Monetary, Fiscal and Exchange rate policies.;;P. A. Samuelson & W. D. nordhaus, Economics, McGraw Hill, NY, 1995.
A. Koutsoyiannis, Modern Microeconomics, Macmillan, 1975.
R. Pindyck and D. L. Rubinfeld, Microeconomics, Macmillan publishing company, NY, 1989.
R. J. Gordon, Macroeconomics 4th edition, Little Brown and Co., Boston, 1987.
William F. Shughart II, The Organization of Industry, Richard D. Irwin, Illinois, 1990.;;
HS 203; Understanding human experience and behaviour : Definition, schools, methods, branches and application of psychology for engineers; Measuring human abilities : Intelligence, PErsonel testing; The individual working life : Personality - definition, approaches and theories; Psychological problems of everyday life : stress and coping; Psychological disorders, work and mental health; Human learning; motivation : THe concept and theoretical framework, motivating people at work; Attitude and work behaviour; Group dynamics Intergroup relations, conflict resolutions; Leadership and management.;;McConnell, J. V. (1986) Psychology, NY : Hold., Rinehart & Wiaton.
Morgan, C. T., King, R. A., Weiss, J. R., & Schopler, J. (1986). Introduction to Psychology (VIIth Ed.), NY : McGraw Hill.
Myers, D. G. (1995). Psychology(IVth Ed.), NY : Worth.
Asch, S. E. (1987). Social Psychology, OUP Oxford.;;
HS 205; 1. What is sociology, some sociological concepts : social structure, status, role, norms, valules etc. Socialization, and culture and change.
2. Social stratification - various approaches and concept of social mobility.
3. Population and society - Trends of demographic change in India and the world, human Ecology, Trends of Urbanization in the developing countries and the world.;;L. Broom, P. Selznick and D. Dorrock, sociology, 11th edition, Harper International, 1990.
M. Haralambos Sociology : Themes and Perspectives, Oxford University Press, 1980.
M. S. A. Rao, Social Movements in India, vols. 1 & 2, 1984, Manohar.
David Mandelbaum, Society in India, 1990, Popular.
M. N. srinivas, Social change in modern India, 1991, Orient Longman.
Guy Rocher, A. General Introduction to Sociology, Macmillan, 1982.;;
HS 423;This course offers a comparative perspective on important trends in modern india. Through highly participatory pedagogic methods, the students are encouraged to  share their special interest in examining specific themes, techniques of theatre representation, acting and writing.
Definitions : the origin and function of drama. The connection between drama, leterature, theatre, cinema and performing arts.
Historical overview of various trends in the West : Naturalism in the plays of Chekhov, lbsen strindberg. Antinaturalistic movements such as expressionalism of Luigi Pirandello, epic theatre of Bertolt Brecht, surrealism in the plays of Samuel Beckett, lonesco. The rise of ritualistic, political theatre of Brook, Schechner, Akalitis.
Developments in post independence Indian drama : Classical ritualistic theatre of Ramlila, Mahabharata etc., Intermediatary or political Folk drama, such as Jatra, Nautanki, Tamasha, Street Plays. Modern naturalistic drama of Badal Sircar, Mohan Rakesh, Vijay Tendulkar.
;;John Gassner(ed.) : A treasury of Theatre : Modern European Drama From Henrik lisen To Jean Paul Sartre Volume 2. Simon and Schuster, NY.
Peter Brook(Tr.) : Mahabharata, Harper and Row, 1985.
Richard Schechner : Performative Circumstances from the Avant Garde to Ramlila, Seagull Publications, 1983.
Eric Bentley : THe playwright As Thinker, 1967.
Girish Kernad (Ed.) : Contemporary indian Theatre Interviews with Playwriters and Directors, Sangeet Natak Akadami, 1989.;;
HS 425;Concept of stress current and historical statur.
The nature of the stress response.  Common sources of stress - biological. Personality and enviornmental. Coping styles - defensive behaviours and problem - solving. Consequences of stress medical, psychological and hehavioural. The role of the social support in mitigating stress. Stress management techniques relaxation, meditation, cognitive restructuring, self control, bio feedback, and time management. The students will prepare their stress profile.;;Walt, S.  " Stress Management for Wellness". Harcourt Brace & jovanovich, NY. 1994.
D. Girdano and G. Everly., " Controlling Stress and Tension", Prentice Hall, 1986.
A. Monat and R. Lazarus, " Stress and Coping : A Anthology", Columbia Univ. Press, 1985.
A. Weisman, " The Coping Capacity", Human Services Press, 1984.;;
CH206;Basicc concepts of quantitative analysis, methods of sampling, errors in chemical analysis of data, general theory of neutralisation,redox, precipitation and complexometric titrations. Solubility product and precipitation, organic precipitants and extractants. A brief curvey of separation methods: solvent extraction and chromatography.

Inorganic Semi-micro qualitative analysis involving4 radicals. Volumetric analysis involving redox, precipitation and complexometric titrations. Gravimetric estimation of metals. Analysis of alloys and minerals.
;;D.A.SKOOG, D.M.West and F.J.Holler, Analytical Chemistry: An introduction, sixth edition, Saunders College Publisher, 1994.

G.H.Jeffery, J.Bassett, J.Medham and R.C.Denny; Vogel s Text book of Quantitative Chemical Analysis,fifth edition, ELBS, 1991.
;;
HS 427;Meaning of Political Economy. Brief critique of mainstream economics. Gandhian approach to objectives of economic activity. Economics and ethics. Theory of consumption. Why and How of village reconstruction. Approach to agricultural and induatrial development. Economics of Khadi. Concept of Swadeshi. Views on public finance amd foreign trade. Views on Communism, Socialism, Cooperatives, Planning and Technology. The role of the state. Theories of trusteeship and decentralization.
;;M. K. Gandhi, Induatrial and Agrarian life and Relations, Navajivan Publishing house, 1986.
A. T. hingorani and G. A. Hingorani, The Encyclopedia of Gandhian Thought, Navajivan Publ. House, 1988.
J. C. Kummarappa, Economy of Permanence Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan, 1984.
Pyarelal, Towards NEw Horizons, Navajivan Publ. house, 1959.
E. F. Schumacher, Small is Beautiful, ABACUS Publications,1974.
D. F. Ross and M. S. Kanthi, Gandhian Economics, Prasad Publications, 1983.;;
HS 429; Socio cultural bases of knowledge and science Conceptions of science : positivistic, realistic, Weberian and forms of conventionalism.
Theory of scientific creativity : Mertonian normative structure of science, notions of creativity of Kuhn, Mulkay, Koestler and  Holton.
Discoveries : singleton and multiples, scientism, antiscience movements, views reflections and institutions, science and religion relations.
Socioeconomic and cultural aspects of scientific and technological revolution. Science and technology, conceptual distinction reconsisdered, and relations between science and technology.;;R. K. Merton, Sociology of Science, Theoretical and Empirical investigations, University of Chicago Press, 1973.
R. Keat and J. Urry, Social Theory as Science, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1975.
M. J. Mulkay, Science and Sociology of Knowledge, george Allen and Unwin, 1981.
R. Dahrendorf, et. al. (eds.), Scientific TEchnological Revolution : Social Aspects, Sage Studies in International Sociology, 8, ISA, 1982.
W. Krohn, et. al. (eds.), The Dynamics of Science and Technology, D. Reidel Publishing Company, 1978.;;
CH 211;Real gases, critical phenomenon,inter molecular forces, potential energy functions, liquid state. Chemical thermodynamics, thermodynamics of solutions, nonideal solutions, solutions of macromolecules including colloidal solutions, phase rule, phase equilibria. Chemical equilibria.;;G.W.Castellan, Physical Chemistry,3rd Ed. Addison - Wesley/Narosa Publishing House, 1993.

P.W.Atkins, Physical Chemistry ELBS/OUP 4th Edition, 1991. G.N.Lewis and Randalll Thermodynamics, (Revised by K.S.Pitzer and L.Brewer), International Students Edition, McGraw Hill, 1961.;;
CH 221;Systematic study of structure, properties and chemistry of hydrocarbons with emphasis on theoretical, stereochemical and mechanistic concepts.;;R.T.Morrison and R.N.Boyd, Organic Chemistry, 6th Ed., Prentice Hall, 1992.

T.W.G. Solomons, Fundamentals of Organic Chemistry, 5th Ed. John Eiley, 1992.;;
HS 431; Salient topics of this course are as follows : The novel : birth of a genre in the eighteenth century; literary ancestors of the novel; evolution of the form; its coming of age in the nineteenth century; status of the novel as an artform; potential for experimentation; self - consciousness and metafiction; the novel in the age of modernism and postmodernism.
In the twentieth century the evolution of the novel form has involved interesting and unconventional experiments such as John Fowles"s the French Lieutenant:s Woman(FLW)(1969), for instance which adapt the literary form of the historical novel into metafiction and magic realism respectively. As a result a radical mode of reading is called for from the reader. FLW among other things offers two endings from which the reader is invited to choose one.;;Charles Dickens : The Mystery of Edwin Drood, 1870, Penguin Books, London, 1993,
John Fowles : The French Lieutenent"s Woman, 1969, Pan Books, London, 1987.
Salman Rushdie : Midnight"s Children, 1980, Avon Books, NY. 1982.
Arnold Kettle : An Introduction to the English Novel, 2nd edition, volumes 1 and 2, Hutchinson Univeristy Library, London, 1951, 1953.
Brian McHale : Postmodernist Fiction, Routledge, London and NY, 1989.;;
CH 437; General chemistry of the transition elements, lanthanides and actinides including atomic nuclei and nuclear reactions, coordination chemistry including theories of metal-ligand bonding, spectral and magnetic properties, organometallic compounds of transition elements, role of transition metal ions in biological processes.;;F.A.Cotton, G.Wilkinson, C.A.Murillo and M.Bochmann, Advanced Inorganic Chemistry, Wiley Eastern, John Wiley, 6th Ed. 1999.

J.E.Huheey, E.Keiter and R.Keiter, Inorganic Chemistry, 4th Ed.,Harper Collins College Publisher, 1993.

D.Banerjea, Inorganic Chemistry Principles, Books Syndicate Pvt. Ltd., 2000.

N.N.Greenwood and E.A.Earnshaw, Chemistry of Elements, Pergamon Press, 1989.;;
HS 435; Language, a unique, higher order, human cognitive faculty has become a major concern of the fields of Psychology. Neuro - Biology and Computer Science in the last two decades, yielding new area of inquiry such as Psycholinguistics.  This course is an introduction to these subfields of Cognitive Science that seek to discover how knowledge of language is represented in the mind/brain of its speakers. The aim of the course is to show that language is a complex and intricate system that is a peculiar adaptation of the human mind or brain and can be studied in the same way as any other intricate and complex psychological adaptation.
Topics to be discussed includes : 
(a) speakers"utilization of their knowledge of language in the production and comprehension of speech, 
(b) language development in children and the biological innateness of the language faculty, 
(c) location of language in the brain and its psychological correlates, 
(d) language deficits and impairments,
(e) language and communication in nonhuman primates, 
(f) language as an evolutionary adaptation specific to humans.
;;T. Bever, Carroll, J. and Miller,  L. (eds.), 1984. Talking minds : The study of language in the Cognitive Sciences. MIT Press.
J. de luce and Wilder, H. (eds.), 1983.
Language in Primates : Perspectives and Implications, Springer Verlag.
A. Elliot, 1981. Child Language. CUP.
F. Newmeyer (ed.), 1988. Linguistics : The Cambridge survey, vol 3, Language : Psychological and Biological Aspects, CUP.
P. Whitelock, Wood, M. , Somers, H. , Johnson, R. and Bennet, P. (eds.), 1987.
Linguistic Theory and Computer Applications. Academic Press.;;
CH 317;Determination of physical constants, purification of solids and liquids and methods of checking their purity. Separation of enantiomers and measurements of optical rotation. Studies of electrophillic/nucleophilic substitution reactions, redox reactions.;;R.M.Roberts, J.C.Gilbert, L.B.Rodeward and A.S.Wingrove, Modern Experimental Organic Chemistry, Hold-Saunders Intnl. Edn., 4th Edn. 1985.
;;
HS 443; Development and growth os some of the major concepts, laws and theories from Babylonian astronomy to quantum theory by which physical scientists explain the phenomena of the extreme world. Use of seleced case studies to stress the interconnection of concepts and conceptual schemes to experimentation and observation, the relation between observed data and theoretical concepts, the intellectual procedures of the working scientists, Social and philosophical ideas, growth of knowledge. Analysis of the role of experience, Logical thinking, and free imagination in science.  In particular, geometry and mechanics are discussed as examples, with special emphasis on the distinction between empirical facts and the language by which those facts are described.;;J. B. Conant, Harvard Case Histories in Experimental Science, Harvard University Press, Vol 1 and 2, 1948.
Suppe, Fredrick, The Structure of Scientific Theories, IInd edition, Illinois Press, 1977.
T. Kuhn, the Structure of Scientific Revolution, University of Chicago, 1962.
S. D. Agashe, A. Gupta and K. Valicha, Science, Technology and Social Change, Univ. of Bombay, 1980.
G. C. Homans, the nature of Social Sciences, Harcourt Brace and World, Inc., 1967.;;
HS 463; The aim of this course is to introduce the students to some of the basic issues pertaining to art through exposure to different art - media and artworks.  The emphasis will on critical analysis of artworks and aesthetics ideas,  with special reference to literature and music. the following problems will be treated as cental.
What is art? Concepts of imitation. Symbolization, Expression, Configuration.
What is aesthetics? Theorizing about art and its relevance to creation, appreciation and criticism of art.
Art and life : (a) art and society;
(b) art and psyche.
Art as an autonomous activity : art and form.
What is aesthetic response? Rasa theory and emotionality; detached contemplation.;;M. Rader, A modern book of Aesthetics : An anthology, Hold, Rinehart and Winston, 1973.
J. Hospers, Introductory Readings in Aesthetics, Free Press, 1969.
R. B. Patankar, Aesthetics and Literary Criticism, Nachiketa Publications, 1969.
V. Raghvan, and Nagendra, An introduction to Indian Poetics, MAcmillan, 1970.
H. Osborne, Aesthetics and Art Theory : An historical introduction, Dutton, 1970.;;
HS 467; A study and examination of the logical, epistemological and ethical problems in the classical schools of Indian Philosophy, science and metaphysics in ancient India. The course will emphasize the insights of ancient Indian thinkers and their perennial preoccupation with issues centering on man and his being in the world in society.;;M. Hiriyanna, The Essentials of Indian Philosophy, Allen and Unwin, 1967.
S. Radhakrishnan, Indian Philosophy, 2 vols., Allen and Unwin, 1966.
S. Radhakrishnan and C. A. Moore, A sourcebook in Indian Philosophy, Princeton Univ. Press, 1967.
Pappu S. S. Rama Rao, indian Philosophy Past and Future, Motilal Banarasidas, 1982.;;
HS 483; Classical Logic : Truth functions, Propositional arguments, Characteristic matrics, Decision methods, Natural deduction, sequent calculus, Axiomatic approach, Quantifier calculus.
Modal operators and modal systems, Natural deduction in modal logics.
Relevance logic : Criteria of relevance, axiomatics and semantics.
Automated theorm proving in these logics.;;Susan Haack, Philosophy of Logics, Cambridge University Press, 1978.
Handbook of Philosophical Logic : vol 1, 2 and 3; D. Gabbay and F. Guenthner, D. Reidel Pub. Co., 1983.
P. B. Thistlewaite et. al., Automated theorm providing in Non - Classical logics, Pitman, 1988.;;
CH 559;The structure of solids. Structural imperfections including crystal defects, non-stoichiometry and solid solutions. Solid state transformations and reactions. Srufaces of solids. Adsorption. Electronic properties of materials. Selected applications of solid state materials: semiconductors, superconductors, solid electrolytes, dielectrics, magnets, phospheros, and solid state lasers. New materials: zeolites, conducting polymers and amorphous semiconductios. Molecular metals, magnets and superconductors.;;D.K.Chakrabarty, Solid State Chemistry, New Age International, 1996. 

H.V.Keer, Principles of the Solid State Chemistry, New Age International, 1996.

P.A.Cox, Electronic Strsucture and Chemistry of Solids, Oxford University Press, 1991.

A.W.Adamson, Physical Chemistry of Surfaces, John Wiley & Sons, 1990.

A.R.West, Solid State Chemistry and its applications, John Wiley & Sons, 1989.

A.Zangwill, Physics at Surfaces, Oxford University Press, 1988.

;;
CH 511;Experiments involving synthesis, characterisation and quantitative measurements.;;;;
HS 485; This course is designe to understand the personal and interpersonal behavioural problems people face within the organization. It also intends  to highlight the techniques of organizational behaviour through which the human resource potentialities of the personnel can be effectively utilized and developed for their self and organizational development.
An introduction of the personeal and interpersonal dynamics of the organization - managing high performance : A challange - work motivation : Theoretical and behavioural framework. Improving work motivation in organizations.
Human resources Development (HRD); Behaviour scientist"s view. Human capacity : Physical and psychological - Builing management, decision, interpersonal and goal setting skills - The functions of HRD and personnel DEpartment.
Organizational change and development(OD) : Brief historical presentation. OD techniques : T group and sensitivity training, management by objective (MBO), transactional analysis (TA), quality circles(QC), performance appraisal (PA), and training programmes. Managing human resources and organizational development : the present rules.;;C. R. Anderson, Management : skills, functions, and organizational Performance, WW. C. Brown, 1984.
W. L. French, C. H. Bell, and R. A. Zawacki, Organizational development : Theory, Practice and Research, Irwin, 1989.
P. Hersey and K. H. Blanchard, Management of organizational Behaviour : Utilizing Human Resources, Prentics Hall, 1988.;;
HS 487; 1. Introduction : A chronological survey of indian plans.
2. Theoretical underpinnings of India"s Planning models.
3. Objectives of economic planning in india - Growth, Price stability, Employment generation, POverty alleviation, Sustainable balance of payments etc.
4. A historical perspective on the economic policies implemented in India to achieve the goals of planned economic development : Monetary and fiscal policies; Industrial policy; Foreign trade and exchange rate policies; Price and wage policies etc.
5. A critique of Indian planning and policies in the light of the select macroeconomic indicators such as : (i) Growth rate(s); (ii) Inflation rate(S); (iii) Unemployment levels; (iv) Incidence of povery; and (v) External payments position.
6. Planning versus privatisation : Lessons from other country experiences.;;Bagchi, A. and Banerjee, N. , Change and Choice in indian industry, K. P. Bagchi & Co., Calcutta, 1982.
Brahmananda, P. R. and PAnchmukhi, V. R., The development process of the Indian economy, himalaya publishing House, Bombay, 1987.
Chakravarty, S. Development Planning : The indian Experience, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1987.;;
BT 251;Biology and bioprocess, Relevance to Society. Procaryotes and eucaryotes. Classification of microorganisms and important cell types. Structure of the bacterial cell. Organization of plant and animal cells, organelles; structure, chemical composition, function. Biomolecules: properties of water amino acids, proteins, carbohydrates, lipids and nucleic acids. Cellular processes: carbon and nitrogen cycle in nature cycle in nature, metabolic grid, clycolysis. TCA cycle and forms of energy in biology, Signal transduction-receptor interactions. Informationtransfer in cells: Central dogma, DNA replication, RNA transcription genetic code and translation. Genetics and inheritance: chromosomes, Mendel s laws, phenotype and genotype,genetic diseases in humans.
Special topics: Genetic engineering, Cell culture and the immune system.
;;B.Alberts, D.Bray. J.Lweis, M.Raff, K.Roberts and J.D.Watson (1989). Molecular Biology of the Cell. Garland Publishing, Inc. 2nd Edition. 

E.J.Gardner, M.J.Simons and D.P.Snustad (1991). Principles of Genetics, John Wiley & Sons, 8th edition.

D.Voet and J.G.Voet (1990). 
Biochemistry John Wiley & Sons.

L.Struter (1965). Biochemistry. W.H.Freeman and Company.
;;
PH 101; Physical quantities, dimensional analysis, velocity and acceleration in plane polar coordinates. Dynamics in non- inertial frame: linearly acelerating frames, rotating frame, centrifucal and Coriolis forces. Conservation of momentum: many particle system, collison in two dimensions, system with variable mass, principle of rocket motion. Motion of rigid bodies: kinematics of rigid body motion, Euler angles, fixed axis rotation, inertia tensor, motion of a symmetrical top. Special theory of relativity: Galilean relativity, Michelson Morley experiment, Fitzgerald contraction and time dilation, Lorentz transformation, Einsteins s formulation of special relativity, space time view -points, four vectors.;;G.Basavaraju and Dipan Ghosh, Mechanics and Thermodynamics, Tata McGraw Hill, 1989. 

D.Kleppner and R.J.Kolendow, An introduction to Mechanics, McGraw Hill, 1973.

M.Alonso and E.J.Finn, Fundamental University Physics, Addison- Wesley, 1980. ;;
HS 489; Classical and modern views on Economy, polity and society : Illustrations from selective texts, Positive theory of the state and the system of control. The structure and the process in modern societies : Social frameworks of knowledge and development, Social change and modernization, Process of society and community formation, Ethnic groups and states, conflicts in multi -  ethnic societies, ethnicity and nation - building.  Critical and systemic approaches to the study of development, world views and paradigms, Polotics and ideology, Problems of social and system integration. Locus of control and agencies of social control : structure of government, citizens and social institutions. Ethical and political orientation : Democratization and democratioc theory responsive, identificational and epistemic conceptions of democracy, Civic morals and provinces of social ethics, Facts and standards, Education in the social and political enviornment, Policy perspectives for sustainable development, inter - state relations and conceptions of world society.;;Harry Elmer Barnes (edited), An introduction to the history of Sociology : The university of Chicagp Press, 1948.
Anthony Giddens and David Held (edited), Classes, Power and Conflict : Classical and Conmtemporary Debates. The Macmillan Press, 1983.
B. G. Norton, Towards Unity Amongst Enviornmentalists, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1992.;;
HS 491; Urban Social Structure.
Social stratification in cities.
Modern occupational structure.
Urban space and social processes.
Tradition and modernity in Urban India.
Changes in gender, kinship and family.
Aspects of urban culture.
Ethnicity and social movements.
Urban conflicts and violence.
The city in a globalizing economy.;;A. M. Shah, B. S. Baviskar and E. A. Ramaswamy, " Social structure and change : Complex organizations and Urban Communities", vol. 3, Sage Publications, 1996.
Veena Das, " Mirrors of Violence", Oxford University Press, 1991.
M. S. A. Rao, " Urban Sociology in India", Oxford University Press.
Milton Singer, " When a Great Tradition Modernizes", Praeger Publishers.
M. N. Srinivas, " Caste : Its Twentieth Century Avatar", Penguin, 1996.;;
PH 115; Error analysis and accuracy of measurement, linear regression. Selected experiments from the following : current and voltage sensitivities of a moving coil galvanometer, measurement of self inductance using Anderson s bridge, resistivity of a thermistor, Helmholtz coil. Fresnel biprism, dispersive power of a prism, Newton s rings. Young s modulus using Koenig s method, moment of inertia of a fly wheel, physical pendulum.;;B. L. Worsnop and H. T. Flint, Advanced PRactical Physics for students, Asia Publishing House, 1971.;;
PH 201; Wave nature of light, Fresnel s equations and their consequences. Spacial and temporal coherence, spectral resolution of a finite wave train, Fourier transform spectroscopy. Interference, Fraunhofer and Fresnel diffraction, interferometers, Polarization.

Propogation of light through matter, dispersion and absorption. Introduction to lasers.;;G. B. Fowles, introduction to Modern Optics, Holt Rain Hart and Winston, 1975.
m. Born and E. Wold, Principles of Optics, McMillan, 1974.
S. C. Lipson and H. Lipson, Optical Physics, Cambridge University Press, 1969.;;
PH 205; Review of quantum concepts: particle nature of light, photoelectric effect, Compton effect, matter waves, wave packets, phase and group velocity, Davisson Germer experiment, Heisenberg uncertainty principle.

Schrodinger equation: probablistic interpretation of wave function, one dimention problems - particle in a box, harmonic oscillator, potential barrier and tunneling. Hydrogen atom, electrons in a magnetic field, Landau levels. 

Elements of statistical physics : density of states, Fermienergy, Bose condensation.

Solid state physics : Free electron model of metals, classical and quantum Hall effect, superconductivity, London equation, coherence and penetration depth, flux quantization applications of superconductivity, SQUIDS.

Nuclear physics : binding energy, nuclear reactions, elements of nuclear reactor, fission and fusion, fundamental forces, elementary particles, quarks and leptons. ;;S. h. Patil, Elements of Modern Physics, Tata McGraw Hill, 1989.
H. S. Mani and G. K. Mehta, Introduction to Modern Physics, Affiliated East West, 1988.
A. Beiser, Perspectives in Modern Physics, McGraw Hill, 1969.
K. Krane Modern Physics, 2nd ed., John Wiley, 1998.;;
CH 206; Basic concepts of quantitative analysis, methods of sampling, errors in chemical analysis of data, general theory of neutralisation, redox, precipitation and  complexometric titrations. Solubility product and precipitation, organic precipitants and extractants. A brief survey of separation methods : solvent extraction and chromatography.
Inorganic Semi - micro qualitative analysis involving 4 radicals. Volumetric analysis involving redox, precipitation and complexometric titrations. Gravimetric estimation of metals. Analysis of alloys and minerals.;;D. A. Skoog, D. M. west and F. J. Holler, Analytical Chemistry : An introduction, 6th edition, Saunders College Publisher, 1994.
G. H. Jeffery, J. Bassett, J. Mendham and R. C. Denny ; Vogel"s Text Book of Quantitative Chemical Analysis, 5th edition, ELBS, 1991.;;
AE 489;;Nil;;;
ES 615;;;;;
ES 617;;;;;
ES 645;;;;;
MGMG 614;Marketing Concept and Process. Consumer and Industrial Buyer Behaviour, Organization Buying: Market Segmentation, Targeting and Positioning, Marketing Information System and Research, Marketing Planning for Industrial and Consumer Products, Marketing Decision Variables: Product, Price, Distribution and Promotion Devices, Marketing Control. Purchasing as Reverse Marketing Process. Advertising and Media Choice. Direct Marketing. Marketing Channels. Sales and Demand Forecasting. Marketing Strategy. Customer Service Management. Product plus Concept.;;Philip Kotler, Marketing Management, Prentice Hall of India, 9th Ed., 1997.
Stanton, Etzel and Walker, Fundamentals of Marketing, Mc Graw-Hill Inc., 19th Edition, 1994.
Reeder, Brierty and Reeder, Industrial Marketing, Prentice Hall of India, 2nd Ed., 1997.
Agarwal, Burger and Reid, Readings in Industrial marketing, Prentice Hall Inc., 1986.
;;
SI 507;;;;;
SI 509;;;;;
SI 521; Randomization and  control  of  clinical  trials.   Sampling in clinical  studies.  Cohort analysis.
  Sampling distributions and hypo-thesis testing for clinical and laboratory data.   Importance  of  type  I, type II errors and sample sizes in  the  design  and  interpretation  of  control trials. Inferencing  with  incomplete  data.

Logistic   and  multiple  regression  models  in drug   response  analysis.   Distribution free tests and nonparametric  regression analysis  of  bio-medical measurements.  Methods  based  on  rank  orders.

Vital statistics. Analysis of survival data. Sampling and testing  in epidemiological studies.
;;Daniel Wayne W., Biostatistics : A  Foundation for  Analysis  in  the Health Sciences (5h ed.),  John Wiley, N.Y., 1991.
Friedman,  L.M.,   Furberg C. and Demets  D.L.,  Fundamentals  of Clinical Trials. Mosby-Year Book Inc., St., Louis, 1996.
Hosmer, D.W. and Lemeshow, S.  Applied 
Logistic Regression, John Wiley and 
Sons,  NY, 1989.
Peace  K.E.  (ed.)  Statistical  Issues  in  Drug Research   and  Development. Marcel  Dekkar, NY, 1990.
Selected Papers from JASA and  Biometrika.
;;
SI 523; Review of continuum model, Transport   phenomena,  Air  quality  modelling, (pollution from chimney), Furnace reaction analysis,
De-icing helicopter blades   (free and moving boundary problems), modelling microwave heating, Food contamination from the packaging, Electron Beam Lithography, Color negative film development, photocopy machine; Selected case studies.

Software Support:  MATHEMATICA, LSODE,  GNUPLOT, MATLAB.
 ;;A. Friedman and W. Littman,  Industrial Mathematics  for  Under- graduates. SIAM Publ. 1994..
J.  Crank,  Free and Moving Boundary 
Problems,  Oxford Univ. Press, 1987.
A.  James (Ed.), An Introduction to Water Quality Modelling, Wiley Pub. 1984.
M.S. Klamkin, (ed.), Mathematical  
Moddelling: Classroom Notes in Applied 
Mathematics, SIAM Publications.
A. Friedman, Mathematics in Industrial 
Problems Part 1  9, IMA Series, 
Springer-Verlag.
Lecture  Notes  on   Heat and Mass Transfer :   A  Problem  Driven  Approach,  M.Sc. in Industrial Mathematics. Univ. Strathclyde, U.K., 1995.

Y.C. Fung,  A First Course in Continuum Mechanics, Prentice-Hall, 1969.
;;
SI 527;;;;;
MM 361; ;;;;
AE 461;Introduction, Various fuels, solid, liquid and gaseous fuels. Aviation fuels requirements and specifications. Chemical thermodynamics, Laws of thermodynamics applied to reacting systems. Equilibrium composition, Adiabatic flame temperature. Chemical kinetics, Reaction rates, Gas phase reactions, Surface reactions. Combustion: Premixed and diffusion flames, Laminar and turbulent flames, Flame velocities, Flame propagation theories, Diffusion flame, Droplet Combustion. Application to gas turbine combustor and rocket engine. ;Nil;K.K. Kuo, Principles of Combustion, Wiley International, 1986.
S.P. Sharma and C. Mohan, Fuels and Combustion, Tata McGraw Hill, 1964
F.A. Williams, Combustion Theory, John Wiley, 1965
A.G. Gaydon and Wolthart, Flames, Chapman Hall, 1979;;
MA 001;      Complex numbers as ordered paris. Argand"s diagram. Triangle inequaility. De Moivre"s Theorem.

Algebra: Quadratic equations and expressions.  Permutations and combinations. Binomial theorem for a positive integral index.

Coordinate Geometry: Locus, Straight lines. Equations of circle, parabola, ellipse and hyerbola in standard forms. Parametric representation.

Vectors: Addition of vectors. Multiplication by a scalar. Scalar product, cross product and scalar triple product with geometrical applications.

Matrices and Determinants: Algebra of matrices. Determinants and their properties. Inverse of a matrix. Cramer"s rule.;;nil;;
MA 585;;;;;
SI 513;  Categorical Data Analysis and Regression: Basic of regression analysis, Estimation, Testing  (point and interval), prediction, checking model adequacy and residual analysis.

Nonparametric Statistics:  Basic tests such as  Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, sign test, median test etc.

Applied Multivariate Analysis :  Discriminant  Analysis, Cluster Analysis, Principal Component Analysis, Factor Analysis.
;;References :

A. Agresti, Analysis of Categorical Data, Wiley, 1990.

A.A.  Sen  and M. Srivastava,  Regression  Analysis  -  Theory, Methods and Applications,  Springer-Verlag, 1990.

W.J.  Conover,  Practical Nonparametric  Statistics,  Wiley,  New York, 1971.
J.D.  Gibbons, Nonparametric Methods in  Quantitative  Analysis, Holt, New York, 1976.
M.  Hollander and D.A. Wolfe, Nonparametric Statistical  Methods, Wiley, New York, 1973.
R.A.  Johnson and D.W. Wichern, Applied 
Multivariate  Statistical Analysis,   
Prentice  Hall,  Inc.,Englewood  Cliffs,  New Jersey, 1982.
;;
CE 606;;NIL;;;
MG 710;;NIL;;;
MA 603;Probability. Random variables. Standard distributions and their applications. Point and interval estimation. Testing of hypothesis. Regression and correlation analysis. ANOVA and ANACOVA. Design of experiments. Sequential analysis;;A.B. Bowker and G.J. Liberman, Engineering Statistics, Asia, 1972. 
N.L. Johnson and F.C Xeen Leone, Statistics and Experimental Design in Engineering and the Physical 
 Sciences, Vol I and II, 2nd ed., Wiley Interscience, 1977 
R.V Hogg and E.A Tanis, Probability and Statistical Inference, 2nd ed., Macmilan, 1983.;;
MG 603;;NIL;;;
ME 114;;NIL;;;
AE 596;;NIL;;;
SI 597;;;;;
AE 314; Experiments on composite laminate fabrication, determination of Poissons ratio, determination of shear centre, tension and flexure testing, compression and impact testing, interlaminar shear, study of UTMs coefficient of thermal expansion, determination of young"s modulus by vibration,determination of natural frequencies, and damping modal analysis by impact excitation, drop-weight impact test.;;;;
AE 316;   
Based on AE 202 and AE 309. ;AE 202 & AE 309;;;
AE 455;  Introduction to static and dynamic aeroelastic phenomena. Divergence, Control Efficiency & Control Reversal - two dimensional Analysis. Divergence of unswept wings. Effect of sweep on divergence and control reversal. Two-dimensional (airfoil) flutter analysis with quasi-steady and unsteady aerodynamic loads. Introduction to buffeting, stall flutter, galloping and vortex-induced oscillations problems. Aeroelastic testing techniques. ;AE 213, AE 317;Y.C. Fung, An Introduction to the Theory of Aeroelasticity, Dover, 1969
B.L. Bisplinghoff,H.Ashley and R.L.Halfman, Aeroelasticity, Addison-Wesley, 1972.
C.H.Scanlan and Robert Rosenbaum, Aircraft Vibration & Flutter, Dover, 1968
E.H. Dowell, A Modern Course in Aeroelasticity, Sitjhoff & Noordoff, 1978;;
AE 459; Lagrangian Mechanics, Constrained Systems, Variational Methods, Lagrange Multipliers, Linear Oscillators, Central Force Systems, Noethers Theorem,Hamiltonian Dynamics, Canonical Transformations, Action-Angle Variables, Rotating Coordinates, Rigid bodies, Small Vibrations. 

;Nil;Hand L.M. and Finch J.D., Analytical Mechanics, Cambridge University Press, 1998. 
Barger V.D. and Olsson M.G., Classical Mechanics, McGraw Hill, 1995
Greenwood, D.T.,Classical Dynamics, Prentice Hall, India, 1990.;;
AE 213; Introduction to Matter-Environment and Interactions. Concepts of Force fields, Equilibrium and Compatibility, techniques and practices for writing internal force diagrams (AFD/TD/SFD& BMD). Theory of deformation of ID continuum subjected to axial,torsional, bending and buckling loads. States of stress/strain at a point. Principle stresses and strains. Stress/strain transformations and Mohrs circle. Failure mechanisms,design of one-dimensional structures and joints. ;Nil;Gere J.M. and Timoshenko, S.P., Mechanics of Materials, CBS Publishers, 1986. 
Byars E.F., Snyder R.D. and Plants H.L., Engineering Mechanics of Deformable Bodies, 4th Ed., Harper and Row Publishers, 1983. 
S.P. Timoshenko and J.N. Goodier, Theory of Elasticity, 3rd ed. McGraw Hill Book Co., 1982. ;;
AE 217; Elements of Measuring Systems and their functions, Calibration, Validity of results,Standards of Measurements, Accuracy, Precision, Sensitivity, Linearity, Hysteresis, Loading Effects, Resolution etc. Order of the sensor/instrument, Time constant, Rise time, Settling time, Dead time, Frequency & Damping. Error analysis motion, strain/force, fluid flow, pressure, flow velocity and direction, temperature and heat flux, sound pressure, frequency and phase. Fundamentals of Electronics, semiconductor transistors & diodes, small signal circuit analysis & gain relations, operational amplifier, instrumentation amplifier, filters, modulators and demodulators, fundamentals of digital circuits, logic gates, A/D and D/A converters, multiplexers, microprocessor etc. ;Nil;E.Doeblin, Measurement Systems: Application and Design, 4th Edition, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1990. 
R.G. Beckwith, N.L. Buck & R.D. Marangoni, Mechanical Measurements, 3rd Edition, Narosa Pub. House, New Delhi, 1989.
B.C. Nakra & K.K. Chaudhary, Instrumentation Measurement & Analysis, Tata McGraw-Hill, New Delhi, 1985.
J.Millman & C.C. Halkias, Integrated Electronics, Tata McGraw-Hill, New Delhi, 1992. 
;;
AE 317;  Thin-walled stiffened structures in aerospace vehicles, basic components and assemblages. General formulation for thin-walled beams. Bending and torsion of thin-walled beams of arbitrary closed and open cross-sections, shear flow and shear centre calculations for general cross-sections,warpless cross-sections. Bending and torsion of multi-cell thin-walled beams - warping, shear flow and shear centre, stresses in thin-walled beams of variable depth, effect of taper. Effect of warp restraint in thin-walled beams, axial constraint stresses, effect of warp restraint in open section beams. Buckling of thin walled beams, torsional instability, introduction to the instability of flat sheets, local buckling of composite shapes, buckling of stiffened sheets, effective width concept, design charts and formulae.  Diagonal tension and semi-tension field beams. ;AE 203 & AE 208;T.H.G.Megson, Aircraft Structures for Engineering Students, 2nd ed. Edward Arnold, London, 1990. 
E.F.Bruhn, Analysis and Design of Flight Vehicle Structures, Tri-State Offset Co.,Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.A. 1965
D.Williams, Introduction to the Theory of Aircraft Structures, Edward Arnold, London, 1960.
B.E.Gatewood, Virtual Principles in Aircraft Structures, Vol.1 & II, Kluwer Academic Publishers, The Netherlands, 1989. ;;
AE 320;  Basic equations of fluid dynamics and levels of approximation. Mathematical nature of the flow equations and their boundary conditions. Grid and appropriate transformation. Basic discretization techniques applied to model equations and system of equations: finite difference, finite volume and finite element methods. Analysis of numerical schemes : concept consistency, stability and convergence. Error and stability analysis. Some applications. ;AE 206; Hirsch C., Numerical Computation of Internal and External Flows, John Wiley and Sons, 1990.
Anderson J.D., Computational Fluid Dynamics, 1995
Anderson D.A., Tenehill J.C. & Pletcher R.H., Computational Fluid Dynamics and Heat Transfer, McGraw Hill, 1984. ;;
AE 417;  


Based on AE 332 ;AE 332;;;
AE 332; Types of Aerial vehicles, their basic principles,advantages/disadvantages/limitations. Product/system design process Formulation of problem-objective function, constraints. Solutions. Aircraft project phases. Configuration: Types and comparison of wing, Tail, Fuselage, Landing Gear, Wing-Tail combinations, Powerplant (types, numbers, locations). Estimation of C, Field length, Allowable CG range, Thrust vs. speed & altitude for propeller and jet. Estimation of preliminary weight, Acquisition cost. Operating cost. Rubber Engine Sizing: Fixed engine sizing. Detailed weights, detailed geometry etc. Detailed design: V-n diagram, design loads, structural layout. Introduction to advanced concepts in aircraft design. ;AE 201, AE 305; 

Daniel P.Raymer, Aircraft Design - A Conceptual Approach, AIAA Educational Series, 1990.
E.Torenbeek, Synthesis of Subsonic Airplane Design, Delft University Press, 1977. 







;;
AE 619; Prelimnaries:state and state space of a system, vector fields and their flows, ordinary differential equations as vector fields, examples of 1D and 2D flows, flows of linear systems. 
Non-linear phenomena: nonexistence and non-uniqueness of solutions, finite-escape time, isolated multiple equilibria, limit cycles, chaos. 
Mathematical Foundations: normed linear vector spaces, completeness, Lp spaces, contraction mapping principle, existence, uniqueness, continuity and differentiability of solutions of ordinary differential equations. 
Stability Theory: Types of stability, Lyapunov stability, attractivity, asymptotic stability, Lyapunovs direct method for Lyapunov stabilty, asymptotic stability and instability, invariance principle and the Krasovskii-LaSalle theorem. 
Applications of Lyapunov Theory: estimation of domains of attraction, the comparison principle and estimation of rate of cnvergence, stabilty in the presence of perturbations, stability of linear systems, Lyapunovs indirect (linearization) method, the Lur"e problem. 
Input-Output stability: BIBO stability, relation between BIBO stability and Lyapunov stability, small gain theorem. 
Special topics : topological methods (Poincare-Bendixon theorem, index theory, Brockett"s theorem), centre manifold theory, Poincare normal forms, methods of averaging and singular perturbations, existence and stability of periodic solutions, chaos. ;Nil; M. Vidyasagar, Non-linear Systems Analysis, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1993.
S.Sastry, Nonlinear Systems: Analysis, stability and control, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1999
H.K. Khalil, Nonlinear Systems, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1996.
V.I. Arnold,O;;
CH 821;;;;;
AE 152;  Nomenclature of aircraft components. Standard atmosphere. Basic Aerodynamics : Streamlines, steady fluid motion, incompressible flow, Bernoulli"s equation,Mach number, Pressure and airspeed measurement, Boundary Layer,Reynolds number, Laminar and Turbulent flow. Airfoils and wings: pressure coefficient and lift calculation, Critical Mach number, Wave drag, Finite wings, Induced drag, Swept wings. Aircraft performance: steady level flight, Altitude effects, Absolute ceiling, steady climbing flight, Energy methods, Range and Endurance, Sustained level turn, pull-up, V-n diagram, Take off and landing. Reentry vehicles: Ballistic and Glide Reentry, Blunt body concept. ;Nil;Ojha S.K., Flight Performance of Aircraft, AIAA Series, 1995.
Anderson, J.D., Introduction to Flight, McGraw Hill, 1989. 
Hale, J.F., Introduction to Aircraft Performance, Selection and Design, John Wiley, 1984. ;;
HS 807;;;;;
AE 218;  Introduction to 3-D elasticity and Airy"s stress function. St.Venants Theory of Torsion. Energy theorems and their applications. Rayleigh methods of structural analysis with continuum and discrete coordinates. Concepts and principles of structural analysis and modelling. Development of simplified structural models and their applications to A/c components. Introduction to matrix methods of structural analysis and computer aided design. ;AE 213;T.H.G. Megson, Aircraft Structures for Engineering Students, 2nd Edward Arnold London, 1990. 
Irving H. Shames and Clive L. Dym., "Energy and Finite Element Methods on Structural Mechanics, Hemisphere Pub Corporation, McGraw-Hill Book Co., N.Y. 1985.
E.F. Bruhn, Analysis and Design of Flight Vehicle Structures, Tri-State Offset Co., Cincinnati, Ohio, USA, 1965. ;;
MA 591;Sheaf cohomology, Grothendieck vanishing theorem, cohomology of Noetherian affine schemes, Cech cohomology, cohomology of projective space, Serre duality theorem, Higher direct images, flat morphisms, smooth morphisms, formal functin theorem, semi-continuity theorem.


;MA 524;R. Hartshorne.  Algebraic Geometry, Springer Verlag, 1977.;;
CES801;;;;;
CE 607;;;;;
GSS801;;;;;
GSS802;;;;;
ME 607;;;;;
ME 609;;;;;
ME 612;;;;;
ME 622;;;;;
ME 623;;;;;
ME 626;;;;;
ME 627;;;;;
ME 628;;;;;
ME 629;;;;;
ME 631;;;;;
ME 633;;;;;
ME 634;;;;;
ME 640;;;;;
ME 644;;;;;
ME 648;;;;;
ME 650;;;;;
ME 652;;;;;
ME 654;;;;;
ME 656;;;;;
ME 668;;;;;
ME 686;;;;;
ME 690;;;;;
ME 703;;;;;
ME 706;;;;;
ME 726; Formulation analysis of methods design problems, Search for alternative solutions, Evaluation criteria, Timing and rating operators, Adjustment for job difficulty, Machine interference, Predetermined time systems, Applying motion and time study ,  Works sampling;;E.V. Krick, Methods Engineering , Wiley, 1962. 
I.L.O Manual on Work Study, Geneva, 1957 
M.E. Mundel, Motion and Time Study Prentice Hall, 1970 
;;
ME 740;;;;;
ME 798;;;;;
CLS801;;;;;
MGS801;;;;;
CE 623;;;;;
CE 613;;;;;
CE 617;;;;;
CE 627;;;;;
MG 680;;;;;
HSS801;;;;;
AE 212;Experiments on analogue devices such as diodes, transistors, operational amplifiers. Digital circuit introduction using flip-flops, gates and microprocessor. Experiments in aerodynamics, propulsion and structures labs.for familiarization with engineering measurements. ;Nil;
Nil ;;
AE 318;
Based on AE 201,AE 305. Flight test program conducted at IIT-Kanpur in December vacation. ;AE 201, AE 305;;;
MM 592;Null;NIL;Null;;
EE 400;Null;NIL;Null;;
GS 628;Null;NIL;Null;;
MG 704;Null;NIL;Null;;
MG 702;Null;NIL;Null;;
MG 706;Null;NIL;Null;;
GS 516;;;;;
IT 640;Effective and efficient handling of Information has been a key requirement for human progress. Developments in computers and communication technologies have permitted evolution of  powerful tools to do this task. This course has been designed to provide a fairly in-depth exposure to these tools and to gain an understanding of the processes involved in designing and operating modern information systems. 

Since all branches of Science and Engineeing need to use these systems, the course is offered as an Institute elective to all branches. The course is also available for Post graduate students of all branches as an elective. 

;;;;
IE 655;A perspective view of applications of O.R.on some major operational problems in manufacturing industries with particular emphasis on emerging trends; cases from variety of types of industries viz discrete units manufacturing & process type industries, conventional as well as more automated and flexible systems etc. Applications on production flow systems , with related problems in areas such as maintenance and quality assurance. Extensive use of published case studies including Indian Industries. The course would bring out the extent of scope of efficient large scale O.R. technique applications, use of heuristics of various types, and indicating problem areas demanding use of knowledge-based systems. Synthesis of systems incorporating successful concepts developed eastern and western countries. ;MG 615;Wiendahl, H.P, Load-Oriented Manufacturing Control, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1995. 
Graves; S.C. Rinnooy Kan, A.H. G and Zipkin P.H. Logistics of Production and Inventory North-Holland, 
 1993 
Turban, E., Decision Support Systems 2nd Edition.,  Maxwell Macmillan International Editions, 1990 
Kerr, R., Knowledge-Based Manufacturing Systems., Addison Wesley, 1991 
Case studies in reputed international journals such as European J.O.R I.J Prod Res., IIE Transaction;;
IE 682; Database system concepts; physical data organisation; data models; realtional model and relation database design; relational commercial languages; knowledge and some paradigms for its representation: rule based, logic based, object oriented; elements of fuzzy logic; search and control strategies; elements of PROLOG and LISP; expert system shells; application of knowledge base systems to production management and production system design. Assignments covering some illustrative examples using Dbase, Prolog, C++, expert system shells and RDBMS software;;Korth H.F. and Sillberschatz A., "Database System Concepts", 2nd Ed., McGraw Hill International Edition, 1991. 
Ullman J.D., "Principles of Database Systems", Computer Science Press Inc., Reprinted by Galgotia Publishers, 1992. 
Patterson D.W., "Introduction to Artificial Intelligence and Expert Systems", Prentic Hall India, 1992. 
Tanimoto S.L., "The Elements of Artificial Intelligence: An Introduction Using LISP", Computer Science Press, 1987. 
Clocksin W.F. and Mellish C.S., "Programming in PROLOG", Springer Verlag, Narosa Publishing House Reprint, 1993. 
Kerr R., "Knowledge-Based Manufacturing Management", Addison Wesley, 1991;;
IE 681;Introduction to basic features of C++ and the object oriented programming paradigm; overview of C; predefined classes in C++; building objects with classes; defining operations on objects; using inheritance in C++; virtual functions and polymorphism; building applictions in C++; elements of discrete simulation; activity cycle diagrams; elements of stochastic simulation; design of and inference from simulation experiments; simulation of job shops and assembly job shops; some other examples in simulation of manufacturing systems.;;Barkakati N., Object Oriented Programming in C++,Prentice Hall India, 1996. 
Graham N., Learning C++,McGraw Hill International Edition, 1991. 
Carrie A., Simulation of Manufacturing Systems,John Wiley, 1988. 
Balagurusamy E., Object Oriented Programming with C++,Tata McGraw Hill, 1995. 
Flaming B., Practical Data Structures in C++, John Wiley, Coriolis - Galotia Publications Reprint, 1995. 
Stroustrup, B., The C++ Programming Language,2nd Ed.Addision-Wesley, 1995;;
IE 710;  The course will take up applications from live problem areas in infrastructural and service sectors. Representative applications will be considered in areas such as transport, energy, and telecom . . The emphasis 
will be on the way OR techniques are used in decision making. 

The applications will be at two levels: Strategic decisions of long term significance such as design of networks for power distribution or transport will be considered. The second area is in operations management at the tactical level, where applications such as routing, scheduling, time tabling and allocation will be discussed. 

Typical problem areas are rail network design and analysis, section scheduling on railway sections, time tabling for vehicles and crew in rail and road operations, analysis of telecom networks and analysis and design of power distribution networks. Solution techniques will be based on mathematical programming and queuing models. The focus will be on detailed modeling  from the application area and selection and usage of an 
appropriate solution methodology. 

;;Patton J. D. (Jr), Maintainability and Maintenance, Management Instrument Society of America, 1980. 
  L Fortuin, P van Beek and L V Wassenhove OR at WORK,Taylor & Francis Ltd.,Londan,1996 
  H P Williams ,Model Building in mathematical Programming,Wiley,New York, 1978 
  M Florian ,The Practice of Transportation Planning,ICTS,Amalti,1983. 
  D Teodorovic ,Airline Operations Research,Gorden and Breach Science Publishers,New York,1988 
  P A Steenberk ,Optimization of Transport Networks,John Wiley and Sons Inc.,New York,1974. 
  B Frederic and C Alian(Editors),Constraints Logic Programming:Selected Research,MIT 
 Pr;;
IE 801;Definition of queuing process. Classification of queuing systems. Transient analysis of M/G/1 and G1/M/1 system. Imbedded chains. The general queue G1/G/1/ 

Applications in inventory models, maintenance policy analysis and traffic control, queuing models in computer systems. Introduction to models for a dam 

;;N.U. Prabhu, Queues and Inventories, Wiley, 1965. 
Tackacs, Introduction in the theory of Queues, Oxford, 1962 
Kleinrock, Queuing Systems, Vols1,2Wiley, 1975 
W.Cohen, The single Server Queue, North Holland, 1969. 
W.L. Smith and Wilkinson W.E (Eds), Consestion theory, North Carolina ,1965;;
MA 630;Introduction :Development of Databases and knowledge bases, Knowledge representing paradigms-Rule based, Logic based, Object oriented, Semantic nets and frames, Uncertainty, Fuzzy logic, Neutral nets. 

Inference mechanisms: Goals, Control Strategies, Forward and Backward chaining Conflict resolution, Explanation, Blackboard model. 

Implementation issues: Knowledge acquisition, Coding ,Expert system shells, PROLOG and LISP 

Selected applications in manufacturing: Product design, Process Planning and Scheduling, Robot movement, Factory layout, Defect analysis, Diagnostic maintenance, Quality control etc. 
;;Kerr, R. Knowledge Based Manufacturing Management , Addison-Wisley ,1991 
Addis , T.R. , Designing knowledge based systems , Prentice-Hall ,1985 
Rolston, T.R. , Principle of Artificial Intelligence and Expert systems Development, McGraw Hill , 1988 
Chung , P.W.H. and Lovegrove , G., Industrial and Engineering Applications of AI and Expert Systems. 
 Gordon and Breach Science publications, 1993. 
 Maus, R. and Keys, J. ,Handbook of Expert Systems in Manufacturing , McGraw-Hill 1991;;
ME 722;Overview of basic elements and features of flexible manufacturing systems; classification of systems and configurations; nature of decision problems in design, operation and control of the systems; methods for part selection, grouping of machines, allocation of tools; scope of application of group technlogy; objectives and approaches in dynamic loading problems; modellilng and optimization in routing decisions; closed queuing networks and related models for performance analysis; Mean Value analysis; models for design and operational control of AGV systems; sequencing activities of machine tending robots; coordination of simultaneous operations by multiple robots; elements of real time scheduling; deadlock problems, their detection and prevention; Petri Net models, their simulation and scope of application; approaches to simulation of FMS; concepts of hierarchical control and applications; parts launching, routeing and sequencing decisions in flexible assembly systems. 

Case studies and applications from leading journals-such as International Journal of Productions Research,International Journal of FMS etc., 
;;Viswanadham N.and Narahari Y., Performance Modelling of Automated Manufacturing Systems, Prentice Hall India, 1994. 
Ranky P.G.,Flexible Manufacturing Cells and Systems in CIM, CIMWare Ltd., Guildford, Surrey, England, 1990. 
Jha N.K.(Ed.),Handbook of Flexible Manufacturing Systems,Academic Press, 1991. 
Kusiak A.,Modelling and Design of Flexible Manufacturing Systems, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1986. 
Askin R.G. and Standridge C.R.,Modelling and Analysis of Manufacturing Systems, John Wiley and Sons,1994. 
Gershwin S.B.,Manufacturing Systems Engineering,PTR Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, ;;
IE 714;Relevance and importance of neural nets, fuzzy systems and combination of such systems in certain problem areas of IE & OR, involving combinatorial optimization, systems modeling , approximations, prediction,  robust control and learning.
  Artificial neurons; network architectures; learning processes; single and multilayer perceptrons; back propagation learning; radial basis function networks; Hopfield models, bi-directional associative memories and combinatorial optimization; Boltzmann machines; Mean Field theory; temporal processing using feed forward networks; dynamically driven recurrent networks; principal components analysis; self-organising maps; ART type models; Neuro-dynamic  programing and reinforcement learning.

 Fuzzy sets; fuzzy rules and fuzzy reasoning; temporal fuzzy logic; fuzzy systems; fuzzy associative memories; fuzzy rule generation using neural net approaches; fuzzy inference systems; fuzzy neural networks; adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference systems (ANFIS); neuro-fuzzy control.

 Applications in areas of: job shop scheduling; time tabling problems; group technology; traffic control; elevator systems; some problems in robot control; time series modelling and prediction
;;Haykin S., (1999), Neural Networks: A comprehensive foundation, 2nd Ed., Pearson Education Asia.

Kosko B., (1994), Neural Networks and Fuzzy Systems: A dynamical systems approach to machine intelligence, Prentice Hall India.

Kung S.Y., (1993), Digital Neural Networks, Prentice Hall India.

Klir G.J. and Yuan B., (1997), Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Logic,Prentice Hall India.

Jang J.S.R., Sun C.T. and Mizutani E., ( 1997), Neuro-Fuzzy and Soft ;;
IE 712;The aim of this course is to look at some models that arise in decision making in an uncertain environment. Models are for analysis, or optimization or both. We also emphasize computational tools. A possible set of topics are as below.

Markov decision processes: finite and infinite horizon models. Optimality of Markov policies. Computational aspects. Examples from inventory systems, resource allocation, etc.

Models from financial engineering: some types of derivatives. Black-Scholes model and pricing of European and American options.

Point processes and their use in queuing models. Stability of queuing models. Little"s law and its extensions. Advanced queuing models in discrete and continuous time.

Some classes of stochastic scheduling rules; minimizing mean sum of completion times on a single machine with and without pre-emptions and index policies. Makespan with and without pre-emptions on parallel machines; due date related objectives.

;IE 611;1 D Bertsikas Dynamic programming and optimal control, Vols 1 and 2. Athena publications. Belmont, 1995.

2) J C Hull Options, futures and other derivatives, Third edition, Prentice Hall India Pvt. Ltd. New Delhi, 1998.

3) R W Wolff Stochastic modeling and theory of queues. Prentice-Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs, 1989.

4) M Pinedo Scheduling: Theory, algorithms and systems. Prentice-Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs, 1995.




;;
ME 756;Review of Manufacturing Processes, Influence of process variables on manufactrugin processes, Roll of numerical modelling in simulating manufacturing processes.
Introduction and fundamentals of FEM, Elastic stress analysis, variational approach, Weighted residue technique, steady and trasient state heat transfer analysis, material non-linearity.
Application of FEM with respect to the problem types (thermal, solid or fluid), Approach to modelling of manufacturing processes (welding, casting, forming, etc.), Discussions on major causes of errors, Training on the use of FEM on sample problems.
Application of other numerical techniques to manufacturing process simulation;Nil;1.Kalpakjian S, Manufacturing processes for engineering materials, 3rd edition, Addison Wesley Longman, 1997.
2.Schey J, Introduction to manufacturing Processes, 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 2000.
3.Zienkiewicz,O.C.,Finite element method,4th edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 1991.;;
HS 704; Since 1975, feminist theory has had an impact on the development discourse. In India too, the womens movement and feminist scholarship has intervened in critical issues related to labour, sexuality, caste, environment, impact of technology and law and politics. Gender has been established as a crucial component of all development programmes and strategies. In this context, this course seeks to introduce the participants to:

1.Contemporary theoretical debates in Gender and Development.
2.Feminist interventions in the institutional framework of development thought and practice in India.
3.Womens struggles for resistance and strategies for empowerment. 
This course, through the use of case material will train students to analyse the interactions between ideas and practices in relation to specific cases and examples of development interventions.

1.	 Debates on Gender and Development: A Background (FromWID to GAD, the Women, Development and Environment School, The Dual strategies framework)
2.	Third World centered Feminism and critiques of development (Dislocating cultures, Re-orienting Western feminism, Postcolonial feminist critiques of Development, Feminisms and Internationalisms)
3.	Analytical concepts in the institutional framework of development; Gender, patriarchy, sexual division of labour, production and reproduction
4.	Understanding the institutional framework of gender and development in India: Gender, caste and Kinship, household and labour, State policies and programmes, gendered poverty.
5.	Womens movements of resistance: Understanding the contemporary womens movement, the spaces made by women in other emancipatory struggles, NGOisation of the womens movement and it;;Ka;;
HS 702;The main objective of the course is to introduce students to the concepts of rights and governance and relate these to current debates on justice and development. This will include understanding in a historical perspective the important role of law in social, political, and economic development. The course will provide students with an understanding of the governance and development debates. It will enable them to understand the importance of laws, policies, social capital and civic participation for improving the effectiveness, accountability and legitimacy of governance for development. The course will also enhance capacity of students to develop and implement policies in public and private and NGO organizational environments.

The major topics to be covered include:

1.	Concepts: Rights, Justice, Citizenship, developmental state
2.	Relationship between Civil society, state, governance and development 
3.	Law, legal evolution and social change
4.	States, markets and governance
5.	Law, inequalities, and governance 
6.	The emergence of the good governance debate: Democratization, participation, social capital, and decentralization.
7.	Issues related to accountability, and ethics
8.	The construction of effective states (e.g. policy-making capacity, civil service reform, , legal processes and the rule of law) 
9.	Human rights issues, and governance for development
10.	Social movements, NGOS, and development advocacy
;;1.	Sugata Bose and Ayesha Jalal, Nationalism, Democracy and Development: State and Politics in India, Oxford University Press, Delhi, 1997.
2.	Marc Galanter, Competing Equalities:Law and the Backward Classes in India, Oxford Univer;;
HS 472;Course objective: The understanding of human physiological and psychological functions is one of the most useful and beneficial assets in a technological and industrial environment. It is for better management of human life that one must have a good understanding of human behaviour, thoughts and feelings. Among these, stress is one of the most common psycho-physiological phenomena of today and moreover, the young have been found to be its usual victims. In fact, stress and its emotional components result from the complex interaction of genetic, physiological, behavioural, and environmental factors, which finally disturb the homeostasis (balance among internal physiological conditions) of the body. This course is designed to cover the entire field of enquiry as given above.  

Course outline:

Fundamentals of behavioural health. Behavioural health and industrial hazards, health aspects related to personality (focus on Type-A personality pattern, converted Type-A persons who are a great challenge of the 21st century), perception and emotionality.

Drug addiction and rehabilitation. Alcoholism and other substance abuse.

Understanding stress and its various causes.

Stress and psychologically-oriented and physically-manifested disorders [Psychosomatic disorders]

Manic depressive tendencies, socialization problems, eating disorders.
Depression and other related psychological states that are also manifest in the technological/industrial environment.

Stress and adjustment :Occupational, social, marital, sexual and environmental aspects.

Technology and subjective well-being (SWB)

;;Andrew W. Baum, Jerome E. Singer & Tracey A. Revenson.  Handbook of Health Psycholo;;
CS 690;;;;;
CS 412;x;x;x;;
ME 414;x;x;x;;
CL 353;;;;;
CL 354;;;;;
HSP601;;;null;;

